The Project Gutenberg eBook, Autumn Leaves, by Various, Edited by Anne
Wales Abbot


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Autumn Leaves
       Original Pieces in Prose and Verse


Author: Various

Editor: Anne Wales Abbot

Release Date: November 30, 2005  [eBook #17189]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUTUMN LEAVES***


E-text prepared by Mark Meiss from page images and corrected digital text
generously provided by the Wright American Fiction Project
(http://www.letrs.indiana.edu/web/w/wright2/) of the Library Electronic
Text Service of Indiana University



Note: Images of the original pages are available through the Wright
      American Fiction Project
      (http://www.letrs.indiana.edu/web/w/wright2/)
      of the Library Electronic Text Service of Indiana University.





AUTUMN LEAVES.

Original Pieces in Prose and Verse.

(ANNA WALES ABBOT, Ed.)







"Our wits are so diversely colored."--Shakespeare.



Cambridge:
John Bartlett.
1853.
Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1853, by
John Bartlett,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.
Cambridge:
Metcalf and Company, Printers to the University.





NOTE.

The pieces gathered into this volume were, with two exceptions,
written for the entertainment of a private circle, without any view to
publication. The editor would express her thanks to the writers, who,
at her solicitation, have allowed them to be printed. They are
published with the hope of aiding a work of charity,--the
establishment of an Agency for the benefit of the poor in
Cambridge,--to which the proceeds of the sale will be devoted.

ANNE W. ABBOT.




CONTENTS.

Christmas Revived.
In the Churchyard at Cambridge. A Legend of Lady Lee.--H.W.L.
The Little South-Wind.
Lines Written at the Close of Dr. Holmes's Lectures on English Poetry.
Aunt Molly. A Reminiscence of Old Cambridge.
The Sounds of Morning in Cambridge.
The Sounds of Evening in Cambridge.
To the Near-Sighted.
Flowers from a Student's Walks.
Miseries. No. 1.
Miseries. No. 2. A Dark Night.
Miseries. No. 3. Twine.
Miseries. No. 4. Fresh Air.
Farewell.
Innocent Surprises.
The Old Sailor.
Laughter.
To Stephen.
The Old Church.
"Something than beauty dearer."
A Tale found in the Repositories of the Abbots of the Middle Ages.
The Sea.
Fashion.
A Growl.
To Jenny Lind.
My Herbarium.
The Ostrich.
Cows.
The Home-Beacon.
The Fourth of July.
From the Papers of Reginald Ratcliffe, Esq.




AUTUMN LEAVES.




CHRISTMAS REVIVED.


It was six o'clock in the morning of last Thursday (Christmas
morning), when Nathan Stoddard, a young saddler, strode through the
vacant streets of one of our New England towns, hastening to begin his
work. The town is an old-fashioned one, and although the observance of
the ancient church festival is no longer frowned upon, as in years
past, yet it has been little regarded, especially in the church of
which Nathan is a member. As the saddler mounted the steps of his
shop, he felt the blood so rush along his limbs, and tingle in his
fingers, that he could not forbear standing without the door for a
moment, as if to enjoy the triumph of the warmth within him over the
cold morning air. The little stone church which Nathan attends stands
in the same square with his shop, and nearly opposite. It was closed,
as usual on Christmas day, and a recent snow had heaped the steps and
roof, and loaded the windows. Nathan thought that it looked uncommonly
beautiful in the softening twilight of the morning.

While Nathan stood musing, with his eyes fixed upon the church, he
became suddenly conscious that another figure had entered the square
upon the opposite side, and was walking hastily along. He turned his
eyes upon it, and was greatly surprised by its appearance.  He saw a
tall old man, although a good deal stooping, with long, straight, and
very white hair falling over his shoulders, which was the more
conspicuous from the black velvet cap, as it appeared, that he wore,
and the close-fitting suit of pure black in which he was dressed, and
which seemed to Nathan almost to glisten and flash as the old man
tripped along. He had hardly begun to speculate as to who the stranger
could be, when he beheld him turn in between the posts by the path
that leads to the church, tread lightly over the snow, and up the
steps, and knock hastily and vigorously at the church-door. But half
recovered from his wonder, he was just raising his voice to utter a
remonstrance, when, to his sevenfold amazement, the door was opened to
the knock, and the old man disappeared within.

It was not without a creeping feeling of awe, mingled with his
astonishment, that Nathan gazed upon the door through which this
silent figure had vanished. But he was not easily to be daunted. He
did not care to follow the steps of the stranger into the church; but
he remembered a shed so placed against the building, near the farther
end, that he had often, when a child, at some peril indeed, climbed
upon its top, and looked into the church through a little window at
one side of the pulpit. For this he started; but he did not fail to
run across the square and leap over the church-gate at the top of his
speed, in order to gather warmth and courage for the attempt.

When Nathan Stoddard climbed upon the old shed and pressed his face
against the glass of the little church-window, he had at first only a
confused impression of many lamps and many figures in all parts of the
church. But as his vision grew more clear, he beheld a sight which
could not amaze him less than the apparition that startled Tam o'
Shanter as he glared through the darkness into the old Kirk of
Alloway. The great chandelier of the church was partly lighted, and
there were, besides, many candles and lanterns burning in different
parts of the room, and casting their light upon a large party of young
men and women, who were dressed in breeches and ruffled shirts, and
hooped petticoats and towering head-dresses, such as he had only seen
in old pictures. They were mounted upon benches and ladders, and
boards laid along the tops of the pews, and were apparently just
completing the decoration of the church, which was already dressed
with green, with little trees in the corners, and with green letters
upon the walls, and great wreaths about the pillars. The whole party
appeared full of life and cheerfulness, while the old man whom Nathan
had seen enter stood near the door, looking quietly on, with a little
girl holding his hand.

It was not until Nathan Stoddard had looked for some little time upon
this spectacle that he began to feel that he was witness of any thing
more than natural. The whole party had so home-like an air, and
appeared so engaged with their pleasant occupation, that,
notwithstanding their quaint dress, Nathan only thought how much he
should like to share their company. But the more he studied their
faces, the more he was filled, for all their appearance of youth and
their simple manners, with a strange sort of veneration. The sweet and
cheerful faces of the young women seemed to grow awfully calm and
beautiful as they brought their task to a close, and their foreheads,
with the hair brought back in the old-fashioned way, to become more
and more serene and high. There was a strange beauty, too, about the
old man's face. He appeared to Nathan as if he felt that the group
before him only waited his command to fade away in the morning light
that struggled among the candles, but he could not bear to give the
word; and so they kept playing with the festoons, and stepping about
the pews to please him. Nathan felt a cold thrill, partly from
pleasure, and partly from awe, running up his back, and a strong pain
across his forehead, seldom known to one of his temperament. Again and
again he drew his hand across his brows, until he felt that he was
near swooning, and like to fall; and he clung desperately to his hold.
When the fit was over, he dared venture no more, but hastened to the
ground.

It was no fear of ridicule or of incredulity that led Nathan Stoddard
to keep secret what he had witnessed. But it was like some deep and
holy experience that would lose its charm if it were spoken of to
another. So he went back to his shop, and sat looking upon the church,
and watching, almost with dread, the doves that lighted upon its roof,
and fluttered about, and beat their wings against its windows.

The minister of Nathan's parish was a young man by the name of Dudley;
and it so happened that he had driven out, before light, on the
morning we have spoken of, to visit a sick man at some distance.  In
returning home, he had to pass along the rather unfrequented street
which runs in the rear of his church, and close to it. As he was
driving rapidly along, his ear caught what seemed the peal of an
organ. He stopped his horse to listen, and a moment convinced him that
the sound both of the instrument and of singing voices came from his
own church; and it was music of a depth and beauty such as he had
never before heard within it. Filled with astonishment, he put his
horse upon its fastest trot, and drove round into the square, to the
shop of Nathan Stoddard.

"There is music to-day in our church, Nathan!" he cried to the young
saddler. "What can it mean?" But Nathan answered not a word. He caught
the horse by the head, and fastened him to a post before the
door. Then stepping to the side of the sleigh, he said to Mr. Dudley,
"Come with me, Sir." Mr. Dudley looked upon the pale face and
trembling lips of his parishioner, and followed in silence.

Nathan sprang upon the shed at the side of the church, and scrambled
up to the little window. Mr. Dudley followed, and, with Nathan's help,
gained the same precarious foothold. "Look in, Sir," said Nathan, not
venturing a glance himself. Mr. Dudley looked, and had not Nathan's
arm been about his body he would have lost his hold, in sheer
amazement. The building was crowded, as he had never known it before;
and crowded with people whom his eye, versed in the dress and manners
of our forefathers, recognized as the church-goers of a century and a
half ago. The singers' gallery was filled by a choir of girls and
boys, while his own place in the pulpit was occupied by a white-haired
figure, whom he recognized as the original of a portrait which he had
purchased and hung in his parlor at home for its singular beauty. It
was said to be a portrait of a minister in the town, who lived in the
last century, and is still remembered for his virtues. The sight of
this old man's face completely stilled the agitation of the young
minister. He was leaning over the great Bible, with his hands folded
upon it, and his eyes seemingly filled with tears of pleasure and
gratitude, and bent upon the choir. Mr. Dudley listened intently, and
could catch what seemed the words of some old Christmas carol:

  "Thou mak'st my cup of joy run o'er."

And he was so rapt with the sights and the sounds within, that it
needed all Nathan's endeavors to uphold him.

By this time the sound of a gathering crowd below, which he had not
heeded at first, was forced more and more upon his notice; and the
anxious voice of his oldest deacon calling, "Mr. Dudley! Mr. Dudley!"
rose high and loud; while a great thundering at the front door of the
church announced that the people below had also caught the sound of
the music, and were clamorous for admission. Mr. Dudley hastened round
to prevent their causing any disturbance to the congregation within;
but he came only in time to see the door burst open, and to be borne
in with the crowd. All gazed about in wonder. The congregation,
indeed, were gone, and the preacher, and the choir; and the room was
cold. But there was a great green cross over the pulpit, and words
along the walls, and festoons upon the galleries, and great wreaths,
like vast green serpents, coiled about the cold pillars. The church of
the Orthodox parish of ---- had been fairly dressed for Christmas by
spirit hands.

When Mr. Dudley reached his home, after the wonder had in part spent
itself, he found that an enormous Christmas pie had been left at his
door by a white-haired old man dressed in black, about six in the
morning, just after he had gone to visit his sick parishioner. The
girl who received it reported the old man as saying, in a tremulous,
but very kind voice, "Give your master the Christmas blessing of an
old Puritan minister." How the meaning of this message would have been
known to Mr. Dudley, had not the events we have told disclosed it, who
can say?

Need I add, that my friend, Mr. Dudley, from whose lips I have taken
down the above narrative, has directed the decorations to remain in
his church during the coming month, and that he avows the intention of
observing the Christmas of the following year with public services,
unless, indeed, he should be anticipated by his ancient
predecessor. It may not be impertinent to observe, that I am invited
to dine and spend the day with the Dudleys on that occasion, and I
shall not fail to make an accurate report of whatever glimpse I may
obtain into the mysterious ceremonies of a Puritan Christmas.




IN THE CHURCHYARD AT CAMBRIDGE.

A LEGEND OF LADY LEE.


  In the village churchyard she lies,
  Dust is in her beautiful eyes,
    No more she breathes, nor feels, nor stirs;
  At her feet and at her head
  Lies a slave to attend the dead,
    But their dust is white as hers.

  Was she, a lady of high degree,
  So much in love with the vanity
    And foolish pomp of this world of ours?
  Or was it Christian charity,
  And lowliness and humility,
    The richest and rarest of all dowers?

  Who shall tell us? No one speaks;
  No color shoots into those cheeks,
    Either of anger or of pride,
  At the rude question we have asked;--
  Nor will the mystery be unmasked
    By those who are sleeping at her side.

  Hereafter?--And do you think to look
  On the terrible pages of that Book
    To find her failings, faults, and errors?
  Ah, you will then have other cares,
  In your own short-comings and despairs,
    In your own secret sins and terrors!

                                    H.W.L.




THE LITTLE SOUTH-WIND.


The little south-wind had been shut up for many days, while his cousin
from the northeast had been abroad, and the clouds had been heavy and
dark; but now all was bright and clear, and the little south-wind was
to have a holiday. O, how happy he would be! He sallied forth to amuse
himself;--and hear what he did. He came whistling down the chimney,
until the nervous old lady was ready to fly with vexation: then away
he flew, laughing in triumph,--the naughty south-wind! He played with
the maiden's work: away the pieces flew, some here, some there, and
away ran the maiden after. What cared _she_ for the wind? She tossed
back her curls and laughed merrily, and the wind laughed merrily
too,--the silly south-wind! Onward he stole, and lifting the
curtain,--curious south-wind!--what did he see? On the sofa lay a
young man: a heavy book was in his hand. The little south-wind rustled
through the leaves, but the young man stirred not; he was asleep; hot
and weary, he slept. The wind fanned his brow awhile, lifted his dark
locks, and, leaving a kiss behind, stole out at the casement,--the
gentle south-wind! Then he met a little child: away he whirled the
little boy's hat, away ran the child, but his little feet were tired,
and he wept,--poor child! The wind looked back, and felt sad, then
hung the hat on a bush, and went on. He had played too hard,--the
thoughtless south-wind! A sick child lay tossing to and fro: its hands
and face were hot and dry. The mother raised the window. The wind
heard her as he was creeping by, and stepping in, he cooled the
burning face: then, playing among the flowers until their fragrance
filled the room, away he flew,--the kind south-wind! He went out into
the highway, and played with the dust; but that was not so pleasant,
and onward he sped to the meadow. The dust could not follow on the
green grass, and the little south-wind soon outstripped it, and onward
and onward he sped, over mountain and valley, dancing among the
flowers, and frolicking round, until the trees lifted up their arms
and bent their heads and shook their sides with glee,--the happy
south-wind! At last he came to a quiet dell, where a little brook lay,
just stirring among his white pebbles. The wind said, "Kind brook,
will you play with me?" And the brook answered with a sparkling smile,
and a gentle murmur. Then the wind rose up, and, sporting among the
dark pines, whistled and sung through the lofty branches, while the
pretty brook danced along, and warbled songs to the music of its merry
companion,--the merry south-wind! But the sun had gone down and the
stars were peeping forth, and the day was done. The happy south-wind
was still, and the moon looked down on the world below, and watched
among the trees and hills, but all was still: the little south-wind
slumbered, and the moon and the stars kept guard,--poor, tired
south-wind! Old lady and maiden, young man and child, the dust and the
flowers, were forgotten, and he slept,--dear little south-wind!




LINES

WRITTEN AT THE CLOSE OF DR. HOLMES'S LECTURES ON ENGLISH POETRY.


[Footnote: The Poets are metaphorically introduced as follows.
ROGERS, _The Beech_; CAMPBELL, _The Fir_; BYRON, _The Oak_; MOORE,
_The Elm_; SCOTT, _The Chestnut_; SOUTHEY, _The Holly_; COLERIDGE,
_The Magnolia_; KEATS, _The Orange_; WORDSWORTH, _The Pine_; TENNYSON,
_The Palm_; FELICIA HEMANS, _The Locust_; ELIZABETH BARRETT
BROWNING, _The Laurel_.]

  Farewell! farewell! The hours we've stolen
    From scenes of worldly strife and stir,
  To live with poets, and with thee,
    Their brother and interpreter,

  Have brought us wealth;--as thou hast reaped,
    We have not followed thee in vain,
  But gathered, in one precious sheaf,
    The pearly flower and golden grain.

  For twelve bright hours, with thee we walked
    Within a magic garden's bound,
  Where trees, whose birth owned various climes,
    Beneath one sky were strangely found.

  First in the group, an ancient BEECH
    His shapely arms abroad did fling,
  Wearing old Autumn's russet crown
    Among the lively tints of Spring.

  Those pale brown leaves the winds of March
    Made vocal 'mid the silent trees,
  And spread their faint perfume abroad,
    Like sad, yet pleasant memories.

  Near it, the vigorous, noble FIR
    Arose, with firm yet graceful mien;
  Welcome for shelter or for shade,
    A pyramid of living green.

  And from the tender, vernal spray
    The sunny air such fragrance drew,
  As breathes from fields of strawberries wild,
    All bathed in morning's freshest dew.

  The OAK his branches richly green
    Broad to the winds did wildly fling;--
  The first in beauty and in power,
    All bowed before the forest-king.

  But ere its brilliant leaves were sere,
    Or scattered by the Autumn wind,
  Fierce lightnings struck its glories down,
    And left a blasted trunk behind.

  A youthful ELM its drooping boughs
    In graceful beauty bent to earth,
  As if to touch, with reverent love,
    The kindly soil that gave it birth;--

  And round it, in such close embrace,
    Sweet honeysuckles did entwine,
  We knew not if the south wind caught
    Its odorous breath from tree or vine.

  The CHESTNUT tall, with shining leaves
    And yellow tassels covered o'er,
  The sunny Summer's golden pride,
    And pledge of Autumn's ruddy store,--

  Though grander forms might near it rise,
    And sweeter blossoms scent the air,--
  Was still a favorite 'mongst the trees
    That flourished in that garden fair.

  All brightly clad in glossy green,
    And scarlet berries gay to see,
  We welcome next a constant friend,
    The brilliant, cheerful HOLLY-TREE.

  But twilight falls upon the scene;
    Rich odors fill the evening air;
  And, lighting up the dusky shades,
    Gleam the MAGNOLIA'S blossoms fair.

  The fire-fly, with its fairy lamp,
    Flashes within its soft green bower;
  The humming sphinx flits in and out,
    To sip the nectar of its flower.

  Now the charmed air, more richly fraught,
    To steep our senses in delight,
  Comes o'er us, as the ORANGE-TREE
    In beauty beams upon our sight;

  And, glancing through its emerald leaves,
    White buds and golden fruits are seen;
  Fit flowers to deck the bride's pale brow,
    Fit fruit to offer to a queen.

  But let me rest beneath the PINE,
    And listen to the low, sad tone
  Its music breathes, that o'er my soul
    Comes like the ocean's solemn moan.

  Erect it stands in graceful strength;
    Its spire points upward to the sky;
  And nestled in its sheltering arms
    The birds of heaven securely lie.

  And though no gaily painted bells,
    Nor odor-bearing urns, are there,
  When the west wind sighs through its boughs,
    Let me inhale the balmy air!

  The stately PALM in conscious pride
    Lifts its tall column to the sky,
  While round it fragrant air-plants cling,
    Deep-stained with every gorgeous dye.

  Linger with me a moment, where
    The LOCUST trembles in the breeze,
  In soft, transparent verdure drest,
    Contrasting with the darker trees.

  The humming-bird flies in among
    Its boughs, with pure white clusters hung,
  And honey-bees come murmuring, where
    Its perfume on the air is flung.

  A noble LAUREL meets our gaze,
    Ere yet we leave these alleys green.
  'Mongst many stately, fair, and sweet,
    The DAPHNE ODORA stands a queen.

May 2, 1853.




AUNT MOLLY.

A REMINISCENCE OF OLD CAMBRIDGE.


In looking back upon my early days, one of the images that rises most
vividly to my mind's eye is that of Miss Molly ----, or Aunt Molly, as
she was called by some of her little favorites, that is to say, about
a dozen girls, and (not complimentary to the _un_fair sex, to be sure)
one boy. There was one, who, even to Miss Molly, was not a torment and
a plague; and I must confess he was a pleasant specimen of the
genus. At the time of which I speak, the great awkward barn of a
school-house on the Common, near the Appian Way, had not reared its
imposing front. In its place, in the centre of a grass-plot that was
one of the very first to look green in spring, and kept its verdure
through the heats of July, stood the brown, one-storied cottage which
she owned, and in which the aged woman lived, alone. Her garden and
clothes-yard behind the house were fenced in; but in front, the
visitor to the cottage, unimpeded by gate or fence, turned up the
pretty green slope directly from the street to the lowly door.

As I have started for a walk into the old times, and am not bound by
any rule to stick to the point, I will here digress to say that the
Episcopal Church (_the Church_, as it was simply called, when all the
rest were "meeting-houses"), that tells the traveller what a pure and
true taste was once present in Cambridge, and, by the contrast it
presents to the architectural blunders that abound in the place, tells
also what a want of it there is now,--this beautiful church stood most
appropriately and tastefully surrounded by the green turf, unbroken by
stiff gravel walks or coach sweep, and undivided from the public walk
by a fence. Behind the church, and forming a part of its own grounds,
(where now exist the elegances of School Court,) was an unappropriated
field; and that spot was considered, by a certain little group of
children, of six or seven years old, the most solitary, gloomy,
mysterious place in their little world. When the colors of sunset had
died out in the west, and the stillness and shadow of twilight were
coming on, they used to "snatch a fearful joy" in seeing one of their
number (whose mother had kindly omitted the first lesson usually
taught to little girls, to be afraid of every thing) perform the feat
of going slowly around the church, alone, stopping behind it to count
a hundred. Her wonderful courage in actually protecting the whole
group from what they called a "flock of cows," and in staking and
patting the "mad dogs" that they were for ever meeting, was nothing to
this _going round the church!_

But to return to the cottage, from which the pretty, rural trait of
its standing in its unfenced green door-yard led me away to notice the
same sort of rustic beauty where the church stood. We did not stop to
knock at the outside door,--for Aunt Molly was very deaf, and if we
had knocked our little knuckles off she would not have heard us,--but
went in, and, passing along the passage, rapped at the door of the
"common room," half sitting-room, half kitchen, and were
admitted. Those who saw her for the first time, whether children or
grown people, were generally afraid of her; for her voice,
unmodulated, of course, by the ear, was naturally harsh, strong, and
high-toned; and the sort of half laugh, half growl, that she uttered
when pleased, might have suggested to an imaginative child the howl of
a wolf. She had very large features, and sharp, penetrating black
eyes, shaded by long, gray lashes, and surmounted by thick, bushy,
gray eyebrows. I think that when she was scolding the school-boys,
with those eyes fiercely "glowering" at them from under the shaggy
gray thatch, she must have appeared to those who in their learned page
had got as far as the Furies, like a living illustration of classic
lore. Her cap and the make of her dress were peculiar, and suggestive
of those days before, and at the time of, the Revolution, of which she
loved to speak.

But we, her little favorites, were not afraid of her. To go into her
garden in summer, and eat currants, larger and sweeter than any we
found at home,--to look up at the enormous old damson-tree, when it
was white with blossoms, and the rich honey-comb smell was diffused
over the whole garden,--was a pleasant little excursion to us. She
took great care and pains to save the plums from the plundering boys,
because it was the only real damson there was anywhere in the
neighborhood, and she found a ready sale for them, for preserves. She
seemed to think that the _real damsons_ went out with the _real
gentry_ of the olden time; and perhaps they did, _as_ damsons, though,
for aught I know, they may figure now in our fruit catalogues as "The
Duke of Argyle's New Seedling Acidulated Drop of Damascus,"--which
would be something like a translation of Damson into the modern
terminology.

But more pleasant still was it to go into Aunt Molly's "best room."
The walls she had papered herself, with curious stripes and odd
pieces, of various shapes and patterns, ornamented with a border of
figures of little men and women joining hands, cut from paper of all
colors; and they were adorned, besides, with several prints in shining
black frames. There was no carpet on the snow-white, unpainted floor,
but various mats and rugs, of all the kinds into which ingenuity has
transformed woollen rags, were disposed about it. The bed was the
pride and glory of the room, however; for on it was spread a silk
patchwork quilt, made of pieces of the brocade and damask and elegant
silks, of which the ladies belonging to the grand old Tory families
had their gowns and cardinals, and other paraphernalia, made. Aunt
Molly had been a mantuamaker to the old "quality," and she could show
us a piece of Madam Vassall's gown on that wonderful and brilliant
piece of work, the bed-quilt. "On that hint" she would speak.

"A-haw-awr! They were _real gentle_ folks that lived in _them_ days.
A-haw-awr! I declare, I could e'en-amost kneel down and kiss the very
airth they trod on, as they went by my house to church. Polite, _they
wor!_ Yes, they knew what true politeness was; and to my thinking true
politeness is next to saving grace."

Once a year, or so, Aunt Molly would dress up in her best gown, a
black silk, trimmed with real black lace, and a real lace cap, relics
of the good old days of Toryism and brocade and the real gentry, and
go to make an afternoon visit to one of her neighbors. After the usual
salutations, the lady would ask her visitor to take off her bonnet and
stay the afternoon, knowing by the "rig" that such was her intention.
But she liked to be urged a little, so she would say, "O, I only came
out for a little walk, it was so pleasant, and stopped in to see how
little Henry did, since his sickness.  You know I always call him _my
boy_." (Yes, Aunt Molly, the only boy in the universe that, for you,
had any good in him.) After the proper amount of urging, she would lay
aside her bonnet and black satin mantle, saying, "Well, I didn't come
here to get my tea, but you are so urgent, I believe I will stay."

Aunt Molly's _asides_ were often amusing. She was so very deaf that
she could not hear her own voice, and often imagined she was
whispering, when she could be heard across the room.

On one occasion she saw a gentleman who was a stranger to her, in the
parlor, when she went to visit one of the ladies who were kind and
attentive to her. She sat a few minutes looking keenly at him, and
then whispered, "Who's that?" "Mr. Jay." "Who?" "MR. JAY." "Who?"
"MR. JAY." "Oh-o-oh! Mr. Jay. Well, what does he do for a living?"
"He's a tutor, Ma'am." "What?" "A TUTOR." "What?" "A TUTOR."
"Oh-o-oh! I thought you said a suitor!"

Aunt Molly owned the little brown cottage, where her widowed mother,
she said, had lived, and there she died. As soon as she was laid in
her grave, it was torn down, and the precious damson-tree was
felled. I was rather glad that the school-house was so ugly, that I
might have a double reason for hating the usurper. If Nemesis cared
for school-boys, she doubtless looks on with a grin, now, to see them
scampering at their will round the precincts of the former enemy of
their race, and listens with pleasure while they "make _day_ hideous"
where once the bee and the humming-bird only broke the quiet of the
little garden.

Aunt Molly had a vigorous, active mind, and a strong, tenacious
memory; and her love of the departed grandeur and Toryism of Court
Row, as she called that part of Brattle Street from Ash Street to
Mount Auburn, was pleasant and entertaining to those who listened to
her tales of other times.

Peace to her memory!




THE SOUNDS OF MORNING IN CAMBRIDGE.


  I sing the melodies of early morn.
  Hark!--'t is the distant roar of iron wheels,
  First sound of busy life, and the shrill neigh
  Of vapor-steed, the vale of Brighton threading,
  Region of lowing kine and perfumed breeze.
  Echoes the shore of blue meandering Charles.
  Straightway the chorus of glad chanticleers
  Proclaims the dawn. First comes one clarion note,
  Loud, clear, and long drawn out; and hark! again
  Rises the jocund song, distinct, though distant;
  Now faint and far, like plaintive cry for help
  Piercing the ear of Sleep. Each knight o' the spur,
  Watchful as brave, and emulous in noise,
  With mighty pinions beats a glad _reveille_.
  All feathered nature wakes. Man's drowsy sense
  Heeds not the trilling band, but slumbrous waits
  The tardy god of day. Ah! sluggard, wake!
  Open thy blind, and rub thy heavy eyes!
  For once behold a sunrise. Is there aught
  In thy dream-world more splendid, or more fair?
  With crimson glory the horizon streams,
  And ghostly Dian hides her face ashamed.
  Now to the ear of him who lingers long
  On downy couch, "falsely luxurious,"
  Comes the unwelcome din of college-bell
  Fast tolling. . . . . .
  "'T is but the earliest, the warning peal!"
  He sleeps again. Happy if bustling chum,
  Footsteps along the entry, or perchance,
  In the home bower, maternal knock and halloo,
  Shall break the treacherous slumber. For behold
  The youth collegiate sniff the morning zephyrs,
  Breezes of brisk December, frosty and keen,
  With nose incarnadine, peering above
  Each graceful shepherd's plaid the chin enfolding.
  See how the purple hue of youth and health
  Glows in each cheek; how the sharp wind brings pearls
  From every eye, brightening those dimmed with study,
  And waste of midnight oil, o'er classic page
  Long poring. Boreas in merry mood
  Plays with each unkempt lock, and vainly strives
  To make a football of the Freshman's beaver,
  Or the sage Sophomore's indented felt.
    Behold the foremost, with deliberate stride
  And slow, approach the chapel, tree-embowered,
  Entering composedly its gaping portal;
  Then, as the iron tongue goes on to rouse
  The mocking echoes with its call, arrive
  Others, with hastier step and heaving chest.
  Anon, some bound along divergent paths
  Which scar the grassy plain, and, with no pause
  For breath, press up the rocky stair. Straightway,
  A desperate few, with headlong, frantic speed,
  Swifter than arrow-flight or Medford whirlwind,
  Sparks flying from iron-shod heels at every footfall,
  Over stone causeway and tessellated pavement,--
  They come--they come--they leap--they scamper in,
  Ere, grating on its hinges, slams the door
  Inexorable. . . . . .
  Pauses the sluggard, at Wood and Hall's just crossing,
  The chime melodious dying on his ear.
  Embroidered sandals scarce maintain their hold
  Upon his feet, shuffling, with heel exposed,
  And 'neath his upper garment just appears
  A many-colored robe; about his throat
  No comfortable scarf, but crumpled _gills_
  Shrink from the scanning eye of passenger
  The omnibus o'erhauling. List! 't was the last,
  Last stroke! it dies away, like murmuring wave.
  Bootless he came,--and bootless wends he back,
  Gnawing his gloveless thumb, and pacing slow.
  Bright eyes might gaze on him, compassionate,
  But that yon rosy maiden, early afoot,
  Is o'er her shoulder watching, with wild fear,
  A horned host that rushes by amain,
  Bellowing bassoon-like music. Angry shouts
  Of drovers, horrid menace, and dire curse,
  Shrill scream of imitative boy, and crack
  Of cruel whip, the tread of clumsy feet
  Are hurrying on:--but now, with instinct sure,
  Madly those doomed ones bolt from the dread road
  That leads to Brighton and to death. They charge
  Up Brattle Street. Screaming the maiden flies,
  Nor heeds the loss of fluttering veil, upborne
  On sportive breeze, and sailing far away.
  And now a flock of sheep, bleating, bewildered,
  With tiny footprints fret the dusty square,
  And huddling strive to elude relentless fate.
  And hark! with snuffling grunt, and now and then
  A squeak, a squad of long-nosed gentry run
  The gutters to explore, with comic jerk
  Of the investigating snout, and wink
  At passer-by, and saucy, lounging gait,
  And independent, lash-defying course.
  And now the baker, with his steaming load,
  Hums like the humble-bee from door to door,
  And thoughts of breakfast rise; and harmonies
  Domestic, song of kettle, and hissing urn,
  Glad voices, and the sound of hurrying feet,
  Clatter of chairs, and din of knife and fork,
  Bring to a close the Melodies of Morn.




THE SOUNDS OF EVENING IN CAMBRIDGE.


  The Melodies of Morning late I sang.
  Recall we now those Melodies of Even
  Which charmed our ear, the summer-day o'erpast;
  Full of the theme, O Phoebus, hear me sing.
  What time thy golden car draws near its goal,--
  Mount Auburn's pillared summit,--chorus loud
  Of mud-born songsters fills the dewy air.
  Hark! in yon shallow pool, what melody
  Is poured from swelling throats, liquid and bubbling,
  As if the plaintive notes thrilled struggling through
  The stagnant waters and the waving reeds.
  Monotonous the melancholy strain,
  Save when the bull-frog, from some slimy depth
  Profound, sends up his deep "Poo-toob!" "Poo-toob!"
  Like a staccato note of double bass
  Marking the cadence. The unwearied crickets
  Fill up the harmony; and the whippoorwill
  His mournful solo sings among the willows.
  The tree-toad's pleasant trilling croak proclaims
  A coming rain; a welcome evil, sure,
  When streets are one long ash-heap, and the flowers
  Fainting or crisp in sun-baked borders stand.
  Mount Auburn's gate is closed. The latest 'bus
  Down Brattle Street goes rumbling. Laborers
  Hie home, by twos and threes; homeliest phizzes,
  Voices high-pitched, and tongues with telltale burr-r-r-r,
  The short-stemmed pipe, diffusing odors vile,
  Garments of comic and misfitting make,
  And steps which tend to Curran's door, (a man
  Ignoble, yet quite worthy of the name
  Of Fill-pot Curran,) all proclaim the race
  Adopted by Columbia, grumblingly,
  When their step-mother country casts them off.
  Here with a creaking barrow, piled with tools
  Keen as the wit that wields them, hurries by
  A man of different stamp. His well-trained limbs
  Move with a certain grace and readiness,
  Skilful intelligence every muscle swaying.
  Rapid his tread, yet firm; his scheming brain
  Teems with broad plans, and hopes of future wealth,
  And time and life move all too slow for him.
  Will he industrious gains and home renounce
  To grow more quickly rich in lands unblest?
  Hear'st thou that gleeful shout? Who opes the gate,
  The neatly painted gate, and runs before
  With noisy joy? Now from the trellised door
  Toddles another bright-haired boy. And now
  Captive they lead the father; strong their grasp;
  He cannot break away.
                         Dreamily quiet
  The dewy twilight of a summer eve.
  Tired mortals lounge at casement or at door,
  While deepening shadows gather round. No lamp
  Save in yon shop, whose sable minister
  His evening customers attends. Anon,
  With squeaking bucket on his arm, emerges
  The errand-boy, slow marching to the tune
  Of "Uncle Ned" or "Norma," whistled shrill.
  Hark! heard you not against the window-pane
  The dash of horny skull in mad career,
  And a loud buzz of terror? He'll be in,
  This horrid beetle; yes,--and in my hair!
  Close all the blinds; 't is dismal, but 't is safe.
  Listen! Methought I heard delicious music,
  Faint and afar. Pray, is the Boat-Club out?
  Do the Pierian minstrels meet to-night?
  Or chime the bells of Boston, or the Port?
  Nearer now, nearer--Ah! bloodthirsty villain,
  Is 't you? Too late I closed the blind! Alas!
  List! there's another trump!--There, _two_ of 'em!--
  Two? A quintette at least. Mosquito chorus!
  A--ah! my cheek! And oh! again, my eyelid!
  I gave myself a stunning cuff on the ear
  And all in vain. Flap we our handkerchief;
  Flap, flap! (A smash.) Quick, quick, bring in a lamp!
  I've switched a flower-vase from the shelf. Ah me!
  Splash on my head, and then upon my feet,
  The water poured;--I'm drowned! my slipper's full!
  My dickey--ah! 't is cruel! Flowers are nonsense!
  I'd have them amaranths all, or made of paper.
  Here, wring my neckcloth, and rub down my hair!
    Now Mr. Brackett, punctual man, is ringing
  The curfew bell; 't is nine o'clock already.
  'T is early bedtime, yet methinks 't were joy
  On mattress cool to stretch supine. At midnight,
  Were it winter, I were less fatigued, less sleepy.
  Sleep! I invoke thee, "comfortable bird,
  That broodest o'er the troubled waves of life,
  And hushest them to peace." All hail the man
  Who first invented bed! O, wondrous soft
  This pillow to my weary head! right soon
  My dizzy thoughts shall o'er the brink of sleep
  Fall into chaos and be lost. I dream.
  Now comes mine enemy, not silently,
  But with insulting and defiant warning;
  Come, banquet, if thou wilt; I offer thee
  My cheek, my arm. Tease me not, hovering high
  With that continuous hum; I fain would rest.
  Come, do thy worst at once. Bite, scoundrel, bite!
  Thou insect vulture, seize thy helpless prey!
  No ceremony! (I'd have none with thee,
  Could I but find thee.) Fainter now and farther
  The tiny war-whoop; now I hear it not.
  A cowardly assassin he; he waits,
  Full well aware that I am on the alert,
  With murderous intent. Perchance he's gone,
  Hawk-eye and nose of hound not serving him
  To find me in the dark. With a long sigh,
  I beat my pillow, close my useless eyes,
  And soon again my thoughts whirl giddily,
  Verging towards dreams. Starting, I shake my bed;--
  Loud thumps my heart,--rises on end my hair!
  A murder-screech, and yells of frantic fury,
  Under my very window,--a duet
  Of fiendish hatred, battle to the death,--
  'T is enough to enrage a man! Missile I seize,
  Not caring what, and with a savage "Scat!"
  That scrapes my throat, let drive. I would it were
  A millstone! Swiftly through the garden beds
  And o'er the fence on either side they fly;
  I to my couch return, but not to sleep.
  Weary I toss, and think 't is almost dawn,
  So still the streets; but now the latest train,
  Whistling melodiously, comes in; the tramp
  Of feet, and hum of voices, echo far
  In the still night air. Now with joy I feel
  My eyelids droop once more. To sleep and dream
  Is bliss unspeakable;--I'm going off;--
  What was I thinking last?--slowly I rise
  On downy pinions; dreaming, I fly, I soar;--
  Through the clouds my way I'm winging,
  Angels to their harps are singing,
  Strains of unearthly sweetness lull me,
  And thrilling harmonies----"Yelp! Bow-wow-wow!"
  "Get out!"--"The dog has got me by the leg!"
  "Stave him off! Will you? See, he's rent my pants,
  My newest plaid!--Kick him!"--"Yow, yow!"--"This house
  I'll never serenade again!--A dog
  Should know musicians from suspicious chaps,
  And gentlemen from rowdies, even at night!"
  "Beat him again!" "No, no! Perhaps 't is HERS!
  A _lady's pet!_ Methinks the curtain moves!
  She's looking out! Let's sing once more! Just once!"
  "Not I.--I'll sing no more to-night!" and steps
  Limping unequally, and grumbling voice,
  Pass round the corner, and are heard no more.




TO THE NEAR-SIGHTED.


Purblind and short-sighted friends! You will listen to me,--_you_ will
sympathize with me; for you know by painful experience what I mean
when I say that we near-sighted people do not receive from our
hawk-eyed neighbors that sympathy and consideration to which we are
justly entitled. If we were blind, we should be abundantly pitied, but
as we are only half-blind, such comments as these are all the
consolation we get. "Oh! _near-sighted_, is she? Yes, it is very
fashionable now-a-days for young ladies to carry eye-glasses, and call
themselves near-sighted!" Or, "Pooh! It's all affectation. She can see
as well as any body, if she chooses. She thinks it is pretty to half
shut her eyes, and cut her acquaintances." I meet my friend A----,
some morning, who returns my salutation with cold politeness, and
says, "How cleverly you managed to cut me at the concert last night!"
"At the concert! I did not see you." "O no! You could see well enough
to bow to pretty Miss B----, and her handsome cousin; but as for
seeing your old schoolmate, two seats behind her,--of course you are
too near-sighted!" In vain I protest that I could not see her,--that
three yards is a great distance to my eyes.  She leaves me with an
incredulous smile, and that most provoking phrase, "O yes! I _suppose_
so!" and distrusts me ever afterwards. Alas!  we see just enough to
seal our own condemnation.

Who is free from this malady? As I look around in society, I see
staring glassy ellipses on every side "in the place where eyes ought
to grow,"--and perhaps most of the unfortunate owls get along very
comfortably with their artificial eyes. But imagine a bashful youth,
awkward and near-sighted, whose friends dissuade him from wearing
glasses. Is there in the universe an individual more unlucky, more
blundering, more sincerely to be pitied?

See that little boy, who, having put on his father's spectacles, is
enjoying for the first time a clear and distinct view of the evening
sky. "Oh! is that pretty little yellow dot a star?" exclaims the
delighted child. Poor innocent! a star had always been to him a dim,
cloudy spot, a little nebula, which the magic glass has now resolved;
and he can hardly believe that this brilliant point is not an optical
illusion. But when his mother assures him that the stars always appear
so to her, and he turns to look in her face, he says, "Why, mother!
how beautiful you look!  Please to give me some little spectacles,
_all my own!_" She could not resist this entreaty,--(who could?)--and
little "Squire Specs" does not mind the shouts of his companions or
the high-sounding nicknames they give him, he so rejoices in what
seems to him a new sense, a _second sight_.

I was summoned, the other day, to welcome a family of cousins from a
distant State, whom I had not seen for a very long time. They were
accompanied, I was told, by a Boston lady, a stranger to us. I entered
the room with considerable _empressement_, but when my eye detected
the dim outline of a circle of bonneted figures, I stopped in despair
in the middle of the room, not knowing which was which, or whom I
ought to speak to first, and at last made an embarrassed half-bow,
half-courtesy, to the company in general. A confused murmur of
greetings and introductions followed, and, throwing aside my air of
stiff, ceremonious politeness, I rushed, with a smiling face, to the
nearest lady, shook hands with her in the most cordial manner, and
then, in passing, bowed formally to the next, who I concluded was the
stranger. What then was my surprise and utter confusion when she
caught me by the hand, and, drawing me towards her, kissed me
emphatically several times. "How _do_ you do, dear? Have you quite
forgotten me? Ah! You don't remember the times when you used to ride a
cock-horse, on my knee, to Banbury Cross, to see the old lady get on
her white horse!" What could I say? I was petrified. I could not
smile, I could not speak. My only feeling was mortification at my most
awkward mistake. Yet I ought to have become accustomed to such
embarrassments, for they are of very frequent occurrence.

"Why, Julia! what is the matter? How strangely your eyes look!"  My
sister at this exclamation turns round, and I discover that from the
other end of the room I have been gazing at the unexpressive features
of her "back hair," which is twisted in a "pug," or "bob,"--which is
the correct term?--and surmounted by a tortoise-shell comb.

But in the whole course of my numerous mistakes and blunders, whether
ludicrous, serious, or embarrassing, I believe I have never mistaken a
cow for a human being, as was done by old Dr. E----. It was many years
ago, when Boston Common was still used as a pasture, and cows were
daily to be met in the crooked streets of the city, that this
gentleman, distinguished for the courtesy and old-school politeness of
his manner, no less than for his extreme near-sightedness, was walking
at a brisk pace, one winter's day, and saw, just before him, a lady,
as he thought, richly dressed in furs.  As he was passing her, he
thought he perceived that her fur boa or tippet had escaped from her
neck, and, carefully lifting the end of it with one hand, he made a
low bow, raising his hat with the other, and said in his blandest
tone, "Madam, you are losing your tippet!" And what thanks did the
worthy Doctor receive, do you think, for this truly kind and polite
deed? Why, the lady merely turned her head, gave him a wondering stare
with her large eyes, and said, "Moo-o-o-o!"

As an offset to this instance of courtesy and good-breeding lavished
on a cow, let me give you, as a parting _bon-bouche_, another cow
anecdote, where, as you will see, there was no gentle politeness
wasted.

The Rev. Dr. H---- was an eccentric old man, near-sighted of
course,--all eccentric people are,--who lived in a small country town
in this neighborhood. Numerous are the traditionary accounts of his
peculiarities,--of his odd manners and customs,--which I have heard;
but it is only of one little incident that I am now going to speak. A
favorite employment of this good man was the care of his garden, and
he might be seen any pleasant afternoon in summer, rigged out in a
hideous yellow calico robe, or blouse, with a dusty old black straw
hat stuck on the back of his head, hoeing and digging in that beloved
patch of ground. One day as he was thus occupied, his wife emerged
from the house, dressed in a dark brown gingham, and bearing in her
hand some "muslins," which she began to spread upon the
gooseberry-bushes to whiten. She was very busily engaged, so that she
was not aware that her husband was approaching her with a large stick,
until she felt a smart blow across her shoulders, and heard his
peculiar, sharp voice shouting in her ears, "Go 'long! old cow! Go
'long! old cow!"




FLOWERS FROM A STUDENT'S WALKS.


As the animal dies of inanition if fed on but one kind of food,
however congenial, yet lives if he has all in succession, so is it
with complex man.

Learn retrenchment from the starving oyster, who spends his last
energies in a new pearly layer suited to his shrunken form.

As animals which have no organs of special sense know not light or
sound as we do, yet shrink from a hand or candle because their whole
bodies are dimly conscious, thus we have a glimmering perception of
infinite truths and existences which we cannot grasp or fully know
because our minds have no special organs for them.

The prick in the butterfly's wing will be in the full-grown insect a
great blemish. The speck in thy child's nature, if fondly overlooked
now, will become a wide rent traversing all his virtues.

As mineral poisons kill, because by their strong affinity they
decompose the blood and form new stony substances, so the soul
possessed by too strong an affinity for gold petrifies.

Our principles are central forces, our desires tangential; it requires
both to describe the curve of life.

The slightest inclination of a standing body virtually narrows its
base; the least departure from integrity lessens our foundation.  The
pyramid, broad-based, yet heaven-pointed, is the firmest figure.  Most
characters are inconsistent, unsymmetrical, and have a base wanting
extent in some direction.

Be not over-curious in assigning causes or predicting consequences;
the same diagonal may be formed by various combining forces.

Through water the musical sound is not transmitted, only the harsh
material noise. In air the noise is heard very near, the musical
sounds only are transmitted. Be thankful, poets and prophets, when you
live in an element such that your uncomely features are known only to
your own village.

"Do not sing its fundamental note too loud near a delicate glass, or
it will break," whispered my friend to me, as he saw me gazing at this
lovely being.

Seek the golden mean of life. Like the temperate regions, it has but
few thorny plants.

Be doubly careful of those to whom nature has been a niggard. The oak
and the palm take their own forms under all circumstances; the fungi
seem to owe theirs to outward influences.

It is a poor plant that crisps quickly into wood. It is a meagre
character which runs perpetually into prejudices.

As light suffers from no change of medium when it falls
perpendicularly, so the consequences of a perfectly upright action, or
cause of action, are strictly fortunate. But let it be ever so little
oblique, the new medium will exaggerate its obliquity; and the farther
it departs from uprightness, the more frightfully it is distorted.

Hoops and coins, which cannot preserve their equilibrium when in rest,
keep it when set in motion. Man also in activity finds his safest
position.

As it takes a diamond to cut and shape a diamond, so there are faults
so obstinate that they can be worn away only by life-long contact with
similar faults in those we love.

Learn the virtue of action. Who inquires whether momentum comes from
mass or velocity? But velocity has this advantage; it depends on
ourselves.

The grass is green after these October rains, because in the July
drought it struck deep roots.




MISERIES.

No. 1.


Did you ever try to eat a peach elegantly and gracefully? Of course
you have. Show me a man who has not tried the experiment, when under
the restraint of human surveillance, and I shall look upon him as a
curiosity. There is no fruit, certainly, which has so fair and
alluring an exterior; but few content themselves with feasting their
eyes upon it. How fresh and ripe it looks as it lies upon the plate,
with its rosy cheek turned temptingly upward! How cool and soft is the
downy skin to the touch! And the fragrance, so suggestive of its rich,
delicious flavor, who can resist? Ah, unhappy wight! Bitterly you
shall repent your rashness. Any other fruit can be eaten with
comparative ease and politeness; a peach was evidently intended only
to be looked at, or enjoyed beneath your own tree, where no eye may
watch and criticize your motions.

I see you, in imagination, at a party, standing in the middle of the
room, plate in hand, regarding your peach as if it were some great
natural curiosity. A sudden jog of your elbow compels you to a
succession of most dexterous balancings as your heavy peach rolls from
side to side, knocks down your knife, and threatens to plunge after it
when you stoop to regain it. You look distractedly round for a table,
but all are occupied. Even the corner of the mantel-shelf holds a
plate, and you enviously see the owner thereof leaning carelessly
against the chimney, and looking placidly round upon his less
fortunate companions. You glance at the different groups to see if any
one else is in your most unenviable predicament. Ah, yes! Yonder
stands a gentleman worse off yet, for, in addition to your
perplexities, he is talking with a young, laughing girl, who is
watching his movements, with a merry twinkle in her bright eyes. He
evidently wishes to astonish her by his dexterity, and disappoint her
roguish expectations. He holds his plate firmly in his left hand, and
proceeds, at once, to cut his peach in halves. Deuce take the blunt
silver knife! The tough skin resists its pressure. The knife and plate
clash loudly together; the peach is bounding and rolling at the very
feet of the young lady, who is in an ecstasy of laughter. Ah! she
herself has no small resemblance to a peach, fair, beautiful, and
attractive without, and, I sadly fear, with a hard heart beneath.

Are you yet more miserable than before? Turn then to yonder
sober-looking gentleman, who certainly seems sufficiently composed to
perform the difficult manoeuvre. He has the advantage of a table to be
sure; but that is not every thing. He begins right, by deliberately
removing the woolly skin. Now he lays the slippery peach in his plate,
and makes a plunge at it with his knife. A sharp, prolonged screech
across his plate salutes the ears of all the bystanders, and a fine
slice of juicy pulp is flung unceremoniously into the face of the
gentleman opposite, who certainly does not look very grateful for the
unexpected gift.

Every one, of course, has seen the awkward accident. O no! That
pretty, animated girl upon the sofa is much too pleasantly engaged,
that is evident, to be watching her neighbors. Playing carelessly with
her fan, and casting many sparkling glances upward at the two
gentlemen who are vying with each other in their gallant attentions,
she has enough to do without noticing other people. She is happily
unconscious of the mortification which is in store for her, or
wilfully shuts her eyes to the peril. Alas! Her hand is resting, even
now, upon the destroyer of all her present enjoyment, the beautiful,
fragrant, treacherous peach. With a nonchalance really shocking to the
anxious beholder, she raises it, and breaks it open, talking the
while, and scarcely bestowing a thought upon what she is about.
Dexterously done; but--O luckless maiden!--the fruit is ripe, and
rich, and juicy, and the running drops fall, not into her plate, but
upon the delicate folds of her dress.

The merry repartee dies away upon her lips, as she becomes conscious
of the catastrophe. It is with a forced smile that she declares, "It
is nothing; O, not of the slightest consequence!" That unlucky peach!
How many blunders, how many pauses, how many absent-minded remarks it
occasions! She makes the most frenzied attempts to regain her former
gayety, but in vain. Her gloves are stained and sticky with the
flowing juice, and she is oppressed by the conviction that all her
partners for the rest of the evening will hate her most heartily. An
expression of real vexation steals over her pretty face, and she gives
up her plate to one of the attendant beaux, with not so much as a wish
that he will return to her. Where are the arch smiles, the lively
tones, the quick and ready responses now? Her spirit is quenched. Her
manner has become subdued, depressed,--shall I say it?--yes, even
sulky.

Ah! I see your courage will not brave laughter. You steal to the
table, half ashamed of yourself as you set down your untasted peach.
Your sudden zeal to relieve those ladies of their plates serves as a
very good excuse for the relinquishment of your own. You have rescued
yourself very well from your dilemma this time. Remember my advice for
the future. Never accept a peach in company.




MISERIES.

No. 2.

A DARK NIGHT.


There are some people who seem to have the faculty which horses and
dogs are said to possess,--of seeing in the dark. But I, alas! am
blind and blundering as a beetle; I never can find my way about house
in the evening, without a lamp to illumine my path. Many smarting
remembrances have I of bruised nose and black eyes, the consequences
of attempting to run through a partition, under the full conviction
that I have arrived at an open door. My most prominent feature has
been rudely assailed, also, by doors standing ajar, unexpectedly,
which I have embraced with both outstretched arms. Crickets, tables,
chairs (especially chairs with very sharp rockers), and other movable
articles of furniture, have stationed themselves, as it would seem,
with malicious intent to trip me up. Some murderous contusion makes me
suddenly conscious of their presence. Then a feeling of complete
bewilderment and helplessness and timidity comes over me. I have not
the least idea in what part of the room I am. I am oppressed with a
sense of chairs, scattered about in improbable places. I long most
ardently for a lamp, or only for one gleam from a neighbor's
window. It is no rare thing for me to discover, by a thrilling touch
upon the cold glass, that I have been feeling my way exactly in the
opposite direction from what I imagined.  Strange how ideas of
direction and distance are lost when the sight is powerless! _Touch_
may find out mistakes, but cannot always prevent them. Touch may
convince me that I have arrived at my bureau, but it is too careless
to perceive (what the poor, straining eyes would have discovered at a
glance) the open upper drawer that salutes my forehead as I stoop
hastily to grasp the handles beneath. Touch is clumsy. It only serves
to upset valuable plants, inkstands, solar lamps, &c., with an
appalling crash, and then leaves me standing aghast, in utter
uncertainty as to the extent of the catastrophe. In such emergencies a
rush for the stairs is the first impulse. Ah! but those stairs!

I will pass over the startling plunge which begins my descent, the
frantic snatch for the banisters, and the strange, momentary doubt as
to which foot must move first, like what a child may feel when
learning to walk. All this only serves to render me so over-careful,
that, when I actually arrive at the foot of the staircase, I cannot
believe it, until a loud scuff, and the shock that follows the
interruption of my expected descent, assure me beyond a doubt. There
is nothing more exasperating than this, unless it may be the
corresponding disappointment in running up stairs, when you raise your
foot high in air, and bring it down with an emphatic stamp exactly
upon a level with the other.

But these are mere household experiences. Sad though they are, I
esteem them as nothing in comparison with my adventures out of doors.
In a dark night, and especially in a night both dark and stormy, I
feel myself one of the most wretched beings in existence. Imagine a
vessel lost in the wide ocean, and without a compass, and you will
have some faint idea of my perplexity, discouragement, and loneliness
at such a time. I have a strange propensity for shooting off into the
gutter, or for shouldering the fences, under the impression that I am
pursuing a straight course. I go quite out of my way to trip over
chance stones, or to pick out choice bits of slippery ice. I splash
recklessly through deep puddles, stumble over unfortunate scrapers,
walk unexpectedly into open cellars, and lay my length upon wet stone
doorsteps. I start back at visions of posts looming up in the
darkness, and whitewashed fences and trees, all of which would be
quite unlikely to be standing in the middle of the sidewalk, and which
disappear at the first reasonable thought. I run into harmless
passengers as if I would knock the breath of life out of them, and
tangle our umbrellas together so fearfully that they spin round and
round some time after their separation. O that umbrella of mine!
Sometimes I hook it in the drooping branches of trees, and, losing my
hold in the suddenness of the shock, have the gratification of feeling
it tip up, and go down over my shoulder into the mud behind me. Its
bone tips tap and scratch at the windows as I go by, and scrape
against the tall fences, like fingers trying to catch at something to
hold on by, and stop my progress. It hits a low branch, and its
varnished handle slips through my woollen gloves, knocking my hat over
my eyes, and extinguishing me for the time being. As if the night were
not dark enough without!

My friends, I could go on much longer with my complaints, but I feel
that I have drawn upon your sympathies sufficiently for the
present. You will be as glad to leave me at my own house-door, as I am
to find it.




MISERIES.

No. 3.

TWINE.


Under the general head of _string_, I might enumerate a long list of
this world's miseries. Shoe-strings alone comprehend an amount of
wretchedness, which is but feebly described in the tragical story of
Jemmy String. Bonnet-strings and apron-strings, dickey-strings and
watch-guards, curtain-cord, bed-cord, and cod-line, each and all have
furnished enough discomfort to make out a long grumbling article. But
I cannot linger to describe their treacherous desertions when their
services are most needed, their unexpected weakness, and their
obstinate entanglements when time presses. A certain pudding-bag
string is commemorated in one of the beautiful couplets of Mother
Goose's Melodies. I am sure you cannot have forgotten it, nor the
staring spotted cat that is there represented racing away with her
booty. That lamented pudding-bag string is but a type of strings in
general. They are fleeting possessions, always hiding, always
misplaced, never in order. You fit up a string-drawer, perhaps, with a
fine assortment, and pride yourself upon its nice arrangement. Go to
it a week after, and see if you can find one ball where you left it!
Can you lay your hand upon a single piece that you want? No, indeed!
Twine is considered common property. If any one has a use for it, he
takes it without leave or license, without even inquiring who is the
owner, and you may be sure he will never bring any of it back again. O
the misery endured for the want of an errant piece of twine, when you
are in a nervous hurry to do up a parcel, some one waiting at the door
meanwhile! After an immense deal of pains, you have it at last folded
to your liking, with every corner squared and even, every wrinkle
smoothed. Then, clasping tightly with one hand the stiff wrapper, you
search distractedly with the other for a ball of twine, which you
distinctly remember tossing into the paper-drawer only the day before.
In vain you surround yourself with newspaper and brown paper, and
useless rubbish, tumbling your whole drawer into confusion. In vain
you relinquish your nicely packed parcel, and see its contents
scattered in all directions. In vain you grumble and scold. The ball
is not forthcoming. Your little brother has seized it to fly his kite,
or your sister is even now tying up her trailing morning-glories, or
sweet peas, with the stolen booty. You plunge your hand exploringly
into the drawer, and bring up a long roll wound thickly with twine of
all kinds and colors. Your eyes sparkle at the prize; but, alas! the
first energetic pull leaves in your hand a piece about four inches
long, and a quantity of dangling ends and rough knots convince you
that you have nothing to hope in that quarter. A second plunge brings
up a handful of odds and ends, strong pieces clumsy and rough, coarse
red quill-cord, delicate two-colored bits far too short, cotton twine
breaking at a touch, fine long pieces hopelessly tangled together, so
that not even an end is visible. The more you twitch at the loops, the
more desperate is the snarl. Poor mortal! Your pride gives way before
the urgency of haste.  You send off your nice packet miserably tied
together by two kinds of twine.

All the rest of the day you are tormented by a superfluity of the very
thing you needed so much. It was impossible to get it when you wanted
it; but now it is pertinaciously in your way when you do _not_ want
it. You almost break your neck tripping over a long, firm cord, which
proves to be a pair of reins left hanging on a chair by some careless
urchin. The carpet and furniture are strewed with long, straggling
pieces of packthread. You find a white end dangling conspicuously from
your waistcoat pocket. As you walk the streets you see twine flying
from fences, or lying useless on the sidewalk, black with dust and
age. To crown the whole, a friend comes with a piece of twine
extending across two rooms, and asks you to help him twist and double
it into a cord. It is a very entertaining process. You amuse yourself
with watching one little rough place that whirls swiftly round, stops
with a jerk, turns hesitatingly one side and the other, then, yielding
to a new impulse, flies round and round again till you are dizzy. You
look with great complacency at the tightening twist, now brought
_almost_ to perfection. You turn it carelessly in your fingers,
scarcely noticing its convulsive starts for freedom. Ah! your
imprudent friend, without any warning, gives it a final pull to
stretch it into shape. The twine slips from your grasp, springs away
across the room, curls itself into a succession of snarls and twisted
loops, and then lies motionless. Your friend looks thunderstruck. With
a hasty apology, you step forward and tightly clasp the recreant
end. You are in nervous expectation of dropping it again. Your fingers
are benumbed at the tips with their tight compression, and the
constant twitching. They give a sudden jerk. You make an involuntary
clutch for the cord, but in vain. It is rapidly untwisting at the very
feet of your companion, who looks at it in despair. Again you make an
attempt with no success at all, the refractory twine eluding your
utmost endeavors to hold it. Once more!  Your fellow-twister walks off
at last, with a wretchedly rough affair, which he good humoredly says
"will do very well."




MISERIES.

No. 4.


I believe the world has gone quite crazy on the subject of fresh
air. In the next century people will think they must sleep on the
house-tops, I suppose, or camp out in tents in primitive style.
Nothing is talked about but ventilators, and air-tubes, and
chimney-draughts. One would suppose that fire-places were invented
expressly for cooling and airing a room, instead of heating it. There
was no such fuss when I was young; in those good old times these airy
notions had not come into fashion. Where the loose window-sashes
rattled at every passing breeze, and the wind chased the smoke down
the wide-mouthed chimney, nobody complained of being stifled. There
were no furnaces then to spread a summer heat to every corner of the
house. No, indeed! We ran shivering through the long, windy entries,
all wrapped in shawls, and hugging ourselves to retain the friendly
warmth of the fire as long as possible. Far from devising ways of
letting _in_ the air, we tried hard to keep it _out_ by stuffing the
cracks with cotton, and closely curtaining the windows and bed. Even
then, the ice in the wash-basin, and the electricity which made our
hair literally stand on end in the process of combing, and the gradual
transformation of fingers into thumbs, showed but too plainly that the
wintry air had penetrated our defences. When we crowded joyfully round
a crackling, sparkling wood-fire, even while our faces glowed with the
intense heat, cold shivers were creeping down our backs, and sudden
draughts from an opening door set our teeth chattering. I often wished
myself on a spit, to revolve slowly before the fire until thoroughly
roasted. Not from any want of air, I assure you, we children were
always breaking panes of glass on the bitterest days, and the glazier
was never known to come under a week to replace them. Why people
should wish to revive, and live through again, the miseries of such a
frost-nipped childhood, I cannot imagine.

I, for one, love a snug house, even a warm house. I am of a chilly
temperament, and subject to rheumatism, horrible colds, &c. Fresh air
is my bane. I banish all books on the subject from my table. I
studiously avoid all notorious fresh-air lovers, or try in every way
to bring over the poor, misguided mortals to my views; but it is of no
use. Fresh air is the fashion, and is run to extremes, as all fashions
must be. I call in a physician; lo! _fresh air_ is recommended as a
tonic. I give a party; of course my windows are all thrown open, and
foolish young girls, in the thinnest of white muslins, are standing in
the draught; and such a whirlwind is raised by the flirting of fans,
and the rush of the dancers, that I am blown, like a dry leaf, into a
corner, where I stand shivering, and making rueful attempts to appear
smiling and hospitable. I go out to pass a social afternoon with a
friend, and am set down in a room just above the freezing-point, with
a little crack opened in the window, and all the doors flying, to
_change the air_. I ride in the omnibus, and am almost choked with my
bonnet-strings, such a furious draught meets me in the face, and when,
with infinite pains, I have secured the only tolerably warm corner, my
next neighbor becomes very faint, and must have the window open. Even
the poor babies are not safe from this popular insanity. You may see
the little victims any day, taking an airing, with their little red
noses and watery eyes peeping forth from under the cap and
feathers. The old-fashioned blanket, in which the baby was done up
head and all, like a bundle, is thrown aside. The child is not quite
so often carried upside down. I suppose, under the new system, but
what difference does it make whether the poor thing is smothered or
frozen to death?

I never shall forget a long journey I took once with a friend who was
raving mad on the subject of fresh air and cold water. Every morning
the windows were thrown wide open, and the blinds flung back with an
energetic bang, while a stiff wintry wind whirled every thing about
the room, and flapped the curtains against the ceiling. And there she
stood, declaring herself exhilarated, while her nose and lips turned
from red to blue, and the tears ran down her cheeks. I always took to
flight. Afterwards the poor auto-martyr went out to walk before
breakfast, scornfully rejecting all offers of furs and extra
wrappings. O dear, no! _She_ never thought of muffs, tippets,
snow-boots, but as encumbrances fit for extreme old age and
infirmity. She always walked fast, and the more the wind blew, the
warmer she felt, I might be assured. As soon as she had gone, I
established myself in comfort by the side of a glowing grate, happy
but for dreading her return. She came in dreadfully fresh and breezy
from the outer air, very energetic, very noisy, and fully bent upon
stirring me up and making me take exercise. After snapping the door
open and slamming it behind her with a clap that greatly disturbed my
nerves, she exclaimed in a stentorian voice, "O dear me! I shall _die_
in such an oven! My dear child, you have no idea how hot it is!" And
the first thing I knew, up would go a window with a crash that made
the weights rattle. It might rain or shine; weather made no difference
to this inveterate air-seeker. Many a time has she come in all
dripping, and tracking the carpet, brushed carelessly against me with
her wet garments, and finally enveloped me with the steam arising from
them as they hung around my fire. It roused my indignation that she
should make herself and every body else so uncomfortable, and then
glory in the deed as if it were indubitably and indisputably
praiseworthy. She was so good-natured, however, and so happy in her
delusion, that I could not find it in my heart to remonstrate very
vehemently, except when she would make me listen to her interminable
lectures upon the importance, the _necessity_, of fresh air, and the
effect of a snug, cosy room upon the blood, the heart, the lungs, the
head, and (as I verily believe she hinted) _the temper_. I know I lost
all control of _mine_ long before she finished; but whether it was the
want of fresh air in practice, or too much of it in theory, I leave
you to imagine.

My friend always carried a small thermometer in her trunk, which she
consulted a dozen times an hour, in order to regulate the temperature
of the room. Alas for me if the quicksilver rose above 60!  I devoutly
hoped she would leave it behind in some of our numerous
stopping-places, and with an eye to that possibility, I must confess,
I hung it in the most out-of-the-way corners I could find; but it
seemed to be on her mind continually. She never forgot it, and always
packed it very carefully, too. I asked her two or three times to let
me put it in _my_ trunk, where I had slyly arranged a nice little
place full of hard surfaces and sharp corners, but she always had
plenty of room.

I believe my zealous friend is now residing at the sea-shore, freezing
in the cold sea-winds, and losing her breath every morning in the
briny wave, under the strange illusion that she is improving her
health.




FAREWELL.


  They tell me my hat is old!
    I scarce believe it so;
  But since I'm uncivilly told
    The dear old thing must go,
  I bid thee farewell, old hat,
                         Good hat!
  Farewell to thee, good old hat!

  I must soon to the city his,
    And trudge to some horrid store,
  A smart new tile to buy,
    With a heart exceedingly sore,
  For I cast off a long-tried friend,
                         A close friend,--
  I'm ashamed of a trusty old friend.

  Ah, let me remember with tears
    The day thou wast first my own,
  When I settled thee over my ears,
    Then with soap-locks overgrown.
  "Hurra for a beaver hat,
                         A sleek hat!
  A cheer for a sleek beaver hat!"

  That day is in memory green
    Among those that were all of that hue;
  Sweet days of my youth! Ah! I've seen
    But too many since that were _blue_.
  How smooth was our front, my hat,
                         My first hat!
  Unbent were our brows, my first hat!

  The first dent,--what a sorrow it was!
    Were it only my skull instead!
  Indignant I think on the cause,
    And pommel my stupid head.
  I was new to the care of a hat,
                         A tall hat,--
  Unworthy to wear a tall hat.

  The omnibus portal, low-browed,
    Had ne'er grazed my humble cap,
  But it knocked off my beaver so proud,
    Which into a puddle fell slap.
  Alas for my dignified hat,
                         My proud hat!
  Woe to my lofty-crowned hat!

  It survived, but it had a weak side,
    And so had its wearer, perchance,
  Since I left it on stairs to abide,
    At a house where I went to a dance.
  A lady ran into my hat,
                         My poor hat!
  She demolished my invalid hat!




INNOCENT SURPRISES.


I am somewhat inclined to the opinion, that, if positive legislation
could be brought to bear upon this subject, making it a criminal
offence for one person deliberately to concoct and designedly to
spring a surprise upon another, society would derive incalculable
benefit from the act. For the ordinary and inevitable surprises of
every-day life are sufficiently frequent and startling to content even
the most romantic disposition; entirely dispensing with the necessity
of those artfully contrived, embarrassing little plots which one's
friends occasionally set in motion, greatly to their own diversion and
the extreme discomfort of the surprised unfortunate. For he who has
ever broken his skull on a treacherous sidewalk, or received from the
post a dunning missive when he expected a love-letter, or arrived one
minute late at the car-station, or taken a desperately bad bill in
exchange for good silver, or been caught in a thunderstorm with white
pantaloons and no umbrella, knows that the unavoidable surprises of
life are in themselves staggerers of quite frequent occurrence, and
require not the aid of human invention. But the surprises which we
most dread are not those which _naturally_ fall to us as part of the
misfortune we are born to inherit; not those which result from
unforeseen accidental circumstances, from carelessness on our own part
or from the folly of others, from revolutions in the elements or in
the affairs of nations; these we _can_ bear, by using against them the
best remedies we possess, or by viewing and enduring them as wisdom
and philosophy teach us to do. No; our only prayer, in this
connection, is that we may be saved from our friends; not from their
carelessness, but from their deliberate schemes against our security.

In order to reconcile this apparent contradiction in terms, take the
following instance of a friendly propensity. You walk into your house
at dusky twilight, at that particular hour of evening at which your
_own brother_, if he be a reasonable being, would not expect you to
recognize him; one of your family extends his (or her) head from the
parlor, and calls upon you at once to enter, and greet "an old
friend." You obey, and are immediately confronted with an individual
whose countenance wears an expression associated with some
reminiscences of your youth, but so dim and undefined is it, that you
cannot, for the life of you, give it its appropriate name or
place. What is to be done? The recollections of early childhood are
expected spontaneously to burst forth from under a heap of later and
more vivid associations, and the name, residence, business, and whole
history of the unwelcome guest are called upon to suggest themselves
within a second's time.

After a long moment of painful hesitation, during which you have in
vain tried to _stare_ his name out of him, you clutch at a struggling
idea, and blurt out the name of one of your former associates. You do
this, not by any means because common sense or conviction suggest the
course, but simply because something must instantly be done. The
result, of course, is, that you hit upon the wrong name; and now your
kind friends can do no more for you; even if they rush to the rescue,
and formally introduce the stranger, it is of no avail. The deed is
done; you are placed in a position of awkward mortification, which
both the stranger and yourself will never forget, and never cease to
regret.

Why it is that the feeling of shame which follows upon such mishaps
attaches itself exclusively to the innocent sufferers, rather than to
those who are the cause of the suffering, I never could
understand. This kind of diversion betrays a want of humane
consideration in the contriver. It is infinitely more cruel and
unamiable than Spanish bull-baitings, or the gladiatorial shows of the
ancients, inasmuch as a shock to the finest feelings of human nature
is harder to bear, and longer in duration, than the momentary pang
induced by witnessing a merely physical suffering.




THE OLD SAILOR.


In my school vacations I used occasionally to visit an old sailor
friend, a man of uncommon natural gifts, and that varied experience of
life which does so much to supply the want of other means of
education. He must have been a handsome man in his youth, and though
time and hardship had done their utmost to make a ruin of his bold
features, and had made it needful to braid his still jetty black locks
together to cover his bald crown, his was a fine, striking head yet,
to my boyish fancy. I loved to sit at his feet, and hear him tell the
events of sixty years of toil and danger, suffering and well-earned
joy, as he leaned with both hands upon his stout staff, his body
swaying with the earnestness of his speech. His labors and perils were
now ended, and in his age and infirmity he had found a quiet haven. He
had built a small house by the side of the home of his childhood, and
his son, who followed his father's vocation, lived under the same
roof. This son and two daughters were all that remained to him of a
large family.

"An easterly bank and a westerly glim are certain signs of a wet
skin!" said the fisherman, pointing to the heavy black masses of cloud
that hung over the eastern horizon, one morning when I had risen at
sunrise for a day's fishing. "'T won't do; don't go out to-day!
There's soon such a breeze off shore, as, with the heavy chop, would
make you sick enough! Besides, the old dory won't put up with such a
storm as is coming. No fishing, my boy, to-day."

His old father said, "Stephen is right. There is a blow brewing." And
he came to look, leaning on his cane. "Stay in to-day."

I yielded, and the sky during the morning slowly assumed a dull,
leaden hue. The storm came on in the afternoon, heavily pattering, and
pouring, and blowing against the windows, and obscuring the little
light of an autumn twilight. I wandered through the few small rooms of
the cottage, endeavoring to amuse myself, while the light lasted, with
two funeral sermons and an old newspaper. Then I sat down at a window,
and I well remember the gloomy landscape, seen through the rain, in
the dusk:--the marsh, with the creek dividing it, the bare round
eminence between the house and the beach, or rather the rocky cliffs,
and on either side the wide, lonely sands, with heavy foam-capped
breakers rolling in upon the shore, with a sound like a solemn
dirge. At a distance on the left, half hidden by the walnut-trees, lay
the ruins of a mill, which had always the air of being haunted. A
high, rocky hill, very nearly perpendicular on the side next the
house, was covered on the sides and top with junipers, pines, and
other evergreens. As the darkness thickened, I left the lonely "best
room" for the seat in the large chimney-corner, in the kitchen. The
old wife tottered round, making preparations for the evening meal, and
muttered recollections of shipwrecks which the storm brought to her
mind. Now and then she would go to a window, turn back her cap-border
from her forehead, put her face close to the glass, shading off the
firelight with her hand, and gaze out into the darkness.

"Asa did not go out either, thank the good Father!" she said. The dog
whined piteously. "St! St! Poor Scip! Here, shall have a piece! Good
dog! A fearful night indeed it is."

The two men came in from the barn, shook off the wet, and drew near
the fire.

"Just such a night, twenty-nine years ago come August, we ran afoul of
Hatteras. You remember, old woman, how they frighted ye about me,
don't ye?"

Amidst such reminiscences we were called to supper. I remember being
solemnly impressed when that old man, bent with hardship and the
weight of years, clasped his hands reverently, and in rude terms, but
full of meaning, asked a blessing upon their humble board. I remember
the flickering light from the logs burning on the hearth, and how it
showed, upon the faces of those who sat there, a strong feeling of the
words in which rose an added petition in behalf of those on the mighty
deep.

Supper being ended, the old man took down the tobacco-board, and, when
he had cut enough to fill his pipe, handed it to his son, who, having
done the same, restored it to its nail in the chimney-corner.  Then
they smoked, and talked of dangers braved and overcome, of pirates,
and shipwrecks, and escapes, till I involuntarily drew closer into my
corner, and looked over my shoulder. Suddenly the dog under the table
gave a whining growl.

"I never seed the like o' that dog," exclaimed the fisherman, turning
to me. "I thought he was asleep. But if ever a foot comes nigh the
house at night, he gives notice. Depend on it, there's some one
coming."

The door of the little entry opened, with a rush of the whistling
wind, and a man stepped in. The dog half rose, and though he wagged
his tail, in token that he knew the step to be that of a friend, he
kept up a low whine. A young man, muffled to the eyes, and with the
water dripping from his huge pea-jacket, opened the kitchen-door.

"William Crosby, why, what brings you out in such a storm as this?
Strip off your coat, and draw up to the fire, can't ye? Where are you
bound, then, and the night as dark as a wolf's throat?"

The young fisherman made no answer, unless by a motion of his hand. As
he turned back the collar from his face, we saw by the waving light
that it was pale as death. The long wet locks already lay upon his
cheeks, making them more ghastly as he struggled to speak. "O Stephen
Lee, it's no time to be sitting by the fire, when old Asa Osborn is
rolling in the waters. A man's drownded; and who's to get the body for
the wife and the children--God pity them!--afore the ebb carries it
out to sea?"

The old man drew his hand across his forehead, and rose. I looked at
him as he drew up his tall figure, and looked the young messenger full
in the eye. In a low, deep whisper, he said, "Who, William, did ye
say? You said a man's drownded,--but tell me the name again."

"Yes, Gran'sir, I did say it. Old Uncle Ase Flemming, he and the
minister went out a fishing in the morning. The minister got his boots
off in the water, and after a long time he's swum ashore. But poor
Uncle Ase--. Stephen, come along. His poor wife's gone down to the
beach, now."

They left the house, and I shut the door after them, and came back
softly to my seat by the old man's knee.

Once before I had seen him, when a heavy sorrow fell upon him. It was
on a beautiful summer's day, and the open window let in the cool
breeze from the sea. He was sitting by it in his arm-chair, looking
out upon the calm water, buried in thought. His favorite daughter had
long been very low, and might sink away at any moment. The old dog was
at his feet asleep. The clock ticked in the corner, and the sun was
shining upon the floor. Some friends sat by in silence, with sorrowful
countenances. His little grandchild came to his side, and said,
"Mother says, tell Grandpa Aunt Lucy's gone home."

The old man did not alter his position. For some time he sat in deep
thought, looking out with unseeing gaze, and winding his thumbs, as
before. Of five fair daughters, three had before died by the same
disease, consumption. He had seen them slowly fade away, one by one,
and had followed his children to the grave in the secluded
burying-ground, where the green sod was now to be broken to receive
the fourth.

Rising slowly, he walked across the room, and, taking the well-worn
family Bible, returned with it to his seat; and, as he turned the
leaves, he said in a low tone to himself, "There's only one left now!"
Then he sat entirely silent, with his eyes fixed upon the sacred
page. He did not utter one word of lamentation, he did not shed a
tear, but as he turned his eye on me, in passing, its expression went
to my heart.  Stealing softly out, I left him to the silent Comforter
whose blessing is on the mourner.

Now the scene was changed. One was suddenly taken from his side who
had been a companion from boyhood to old age. They had played and
worked in company; together they had embarked on their first voyage,
and their last; and they had settled down in close neighborhood in the
evening of their days. Each had preserved the other's life in some
moment of peril, but took small praise to himself for so simple an act
of duty. Few words of fondness had ever passed between them. They had
gone along the path of life, without perhaps being conscious of any
peculiarly strong tie of friendship binding them together, till they
were thus torn asunder. The death of a daughter, long and slowly
wasting away before his eyes, could be calmly borne. But this blow was
wholly unforeseen, and his chest heavily rose and fell, and by the
bright firelight I saw tears rolling over his weather-beaten cheeks.

  "A child will weep a bramble's smart,
   A maid to see her sparrow part,
   A stripling for a woman's heart;
   Talk not of grief, till thou hast seen
   The hard-drawn tears of bearded men."

The fury of the storm being abated, I resolved to follow Stephen down
to the shore. He was not in sight, and I knew not what direction to
take. It was a gloomy night, the transient glimpses of the moon
between driving masses of clouds only making the scene more wild and
appalling. I could see the tops of the tall trees bending under the
fury of the blast, ere it came to sweep the beach. The heaving billows
were covered with foam, far as the eye could reach, and, rising and
tumbling, seemed striving with each other as they rolled on towards
the sands. I had seen storms upon the ocean before, but never had it
presented so awful and majestic an appearance. As the breakers struck
upon the shore, and sent a huge mass of water upon the sands, their
sullen roar mingled with the howling and rushing of the wind, and
filled me with awe.

There were torches upon the beach, and as I drew near, I saw the
fishermen run together to one point. The body had just been washed
ashore, and lay stretched upon the sands. The head was bare, and long
locks of white hair streamed down upon the shoulders. The heavy
pea-jacket was off from one arm, as if he had endeavored to extricate
himself from it in the water. The sinewy arms lay powerless and free
from tension then, but they told me that, when they first drew him
from the surf, both hands were grasping a broken oar with such
strength that they were unable to loose his hold, till suddenly the
muscles relaxed, and the arms fell upon the ground. They turned the
body, and a little water ran from the mouth. Then, gently raising it
upon their shoulders, they bore it home.




LAUGHTER.


In some individuals the risibles lie so near the surface that you may
tickle them with a feather. In others, they are so deeply imbedded in
phlegm, or so protected by the crust of ill-humor, that a strong
thrust and a keen weapon are required to reach them.

A laugh is in itself a different thing in different individuals.  Some
persons laugh inwardly, unsocially, bitterly. It is a pure grimace on
your part when you join in their merriment, unless you are superior to
the fear of ridicule. On the other hand, there is a laugh of so
contagious a nature, that you are irresistibly moved to sympathy while
ignorant of the exciting cause, or out of the sphere of its
influence. You will laugh loud and long, and afterwards confess that
you had not the least gleam of a funny idea, all the while.

You doubt the power of the sympathetic laugh? Come with me into the
nursery. Here is a rosy little horror, a year and a half old. Sit down
and take him upon your knees. Hold his dimpled hands in yours, and
look steadily into his roguish eyes. Repeat a nursery rhyme, no matter
what, in a humdrum recitative; he is sober, and very attentive.
Suddenly spring a mine upon him with a "Boo!" His "Hicketty-hick!"
follows, and his eyes begin to shine. Repeat the experiment.
"Hicketty-hick!" again, more heartily than at first, with the baby
encore, "Adin!" The same process awakens the rapturous little pearls
again and again, and you are quite in the spirit of the thing
yourself. Now for a more ecstatic burst. You purposely prolong his
suspense; he is all atilt, expecting the delightful surprise. You
drawl out each word; you drone the ditty over and over again, till
every tiny nerve is tense with expectation. "Boo!" at last, and over
he goes, in the complete _abandon_ of baby glee; his cherry lips are
wide asunder, his head hangs powerless back, and the "Hicketty-hicks"
burst tumultuously from his little, beating throat. And _you_, sir;
what are _you_ doing?  Laughing, I declare, in full roar, till the
tears run down your cheeks. You catch the boy in your arms, toss him,
almost throttle him with kisses, and so enhance the merry spasms, that
mamma, who has a philosophical instinct with regard to excited nerves,
and dreads the reaction, comes to the rescue.

Let me introduce you to another effective laughter. You shall not hear
a sound, yet you cannot choose but laugh, if she does, quiet as she is
about it. See how her shoulders shake,--and look at her face!  Every
feature is instinct with mirth; the color mounts to the roots of the
hair; the curls vibrate; the eyes sparkle through tears; the white
teeth glisten; the very nose and ears seem to take a part; like
Nourmahal, she "laughs all over," and while you wonder what the joke
may be, you are laughing too.

Do you feel dismal, or anxious? You should hear L. tell a story.  She
is one of the very few who can undertake with impunity to talk and
laugh at the same time. Look and listen, while she describes some
comic occurrence. There is no unladylike, boisterous noise, but
musical peals of laughter come thick and fast; and faster and thicker,
preternaturally fast and thick, come the words with them. And yet each
word is distinct; you do not lose a syllable. And I should like to see
the man who can resist her, if she chooses he should laugh, even at
his own expense.

There is an odd sort of power, too, in the gravity with which B.
tells a humorous anecdote. He invariably maintains a sober face while
every body is in an agony of laughter around him. Just as it begins to
subside, the echo of his own wit comes back to him, and, as if he had
just caught the idea, he bursts into one little abrupt explosion, so
genuine, so full of heartiness, that it sets every body off upon a
fresh score.

Nothing so melts away reserve among strangers, nothing so quickly
develops the affinities in chance society, as laughter. A person might
be ever so polite, and even kind, and talk sentiment a whole day, and
it would not draw me so near to him as the mutual enjoyment of one
heartfelt laugh. It is a perfect bond of union; for the time being,
you have but one soul between you.




TO STEPHEN.


  I saw thee only once, dear boy, and it may be, perchance,
  That ne'er again on earth my eyes shall meet thy gentle glance;
  Years have gone by since then, and thou no longer art the child,
  With earnest eye, and frolic laugh, and look so clear and mild;
  For thee, the smiles and tears and sports of infancy are gone,
  And youth's bright promise, gliding into manhood, has come on;--
  And yet thine image, as a child, will ever stay with me,
  As bright as when, so long ago, I met and welcomed thee.

    What was the charm that lay enshrined within thy smiling eyes?
  What made me all thy childish, winning ways so dearly prize?
  It was thy likeness to another,--one whose looks of love,
  No longer blessing earth, were met by angel eyes above.
  Yet thou hadst not the golden hair, the brow of radiant white,
  Nor the blue eyes so soft and deep, like violets dewy bright;
  But the smiles that played about thy mouth, the sweetness in thine
        eyes,
  The dimpling cheek that said, "Within, a sunny spirit lies,"
  The true and open brow, the bird-like voice, so free and clear,
  The glance that told, "I have not learned the meaning yet of fear,"
  And more than all, the trusting heart, so lavish of its treasure,
  In simple faith, its earnest love bestowing without measure;
  These, more than lines and colors, made a picture, warm and bright,
  Of one whose face no more might cheer and bless my earthly sight.

    The nature, beautiful and pure, he carried to the skies,
  Has been trained by angel teaching, has been watched by seraph eyes.
  Dear boy! through this cold world _thy_ earth-bound feet have trod;
        and now,
  Is the loving heart still thine? Hast kept that true and open brow?




THE OLD CHURCH.


There are certain old-fashioned people who find fault with the
luxuriousness of our churches, and ascribe to the warmth and comfort,
which contrast so strongly with the hardships of early times, the
acknowledged sleepiness of modern congregations. For my part, I see no
necessary connection between discomfort and devotion. _My_ soul, at
least, sympathizes so much with its physical adjunct, that, when the
latter is uncomfortable, the former is never quite free and active.

Let me call to remembrance the church my childhood knew, with its
capacious square pews, in which half the audience turned their backs
upon the minister; the seats made to rise and fall, for the
convenience of standing, and which closed every prayer with a clap of
thunder; its many aisles, like streets and lanes; the old men's seats,
and the queer but venerable figures that were seen in them,--some with
black-silk caps to protect their bald heads from the freezing draughts
of air from the porchless doors; the old women's seats, on the
opposite side; the elevated row of pews round the sides of the church,
and the envied position of certain little children who had an
extensive prospect through the open pew-top within doors, and a view
of the hay-scales and the town-pump through the window besides. Those
windows, in a double row, with the gallery between,--how regularly I
counted the small panes, always forgetting the number, to make the
same weary task necessary every Sunday! The singing-seats, projecting
from the central portion of the gallery, furnished me with another
hebdomadal study, in large gilt letters of antique awkwardness, which
so impressed themselves on my mind that I see them now. This was the
golden legend: "BUILT, 1770. ENLARGED, 1795." I remember hearing a wag
propose to add as another remarkable fact, "SCOURED, 1818."

Opposite to the singing-seats towered the pulpit, from which the
clergyman looked down upon us like a sparrow upon the house-top. He
seemed in perpetual danger of being extinguished by a huge
sounding-board. Very earnestly I used to gaze at the slender point by
which it hung suspended, and wished, if it _must_ come down, that I
might make the gilt ornament at the apex, resembling a vase turned
upside down, my prize. Under the pulpit was a closet, which some one
veraciously assured me was the place where the tithingman imprisoned
incautiously playful urchins.  The terrors of that dark, mysterious
cell had little effect on my conduct, however, as I was not entirely
convinced of the existence of any such lynx-eyed functionary.

The largest church in the county, it was, however, well filled, many
of the congregation coming five and some even six miles, and remaining
there through the noon intermission, which, on their account, was made
as short as possible. But in winter the vast airy space had a peculiar
and searching chill. No barn could be colder, except that the numerous
footstoves made some little change in the air during service. The
minister stood upon a heated slab of soap-stone. I used to watch this
in its progress up the broad aisle and the pulpit stairs, under the
arm of the boy from the parsonage, and the irreverent way in which he
made his descent, in view of the assembly, after depositing his
burden, was thus rebuked by an old lady who was always droll and
quaint. "Why, Matthew, when you come down the pulpit stairs of a
Sunday, you throw up your heels like a horse coming out of a
stable-door."

Older grew the church, and colder; and if people then staid at home on
Sunday afternoons, they had a better excuse for doing so than their
successors can muster. The chorister, even, was frequently among the
missing, but was charitably supposed to be subject to the ague.
Efforts were made to prevail upon the elderly part of the parish to
permit the introduction of stoves with long funnels. They scorned the
enervating luxury! Their fathers had worshipped in the cold, and their
sons might. But ah! how degenerate were the descendants of the noble
old Puritan church-goers! The services curtailed to half their proper
length, yet finding the patience of the listeners all too short! The
degenerate descendants carried the day, however, the most bigoted of
their opposers becoming disabled by rheumatism. The old sexton,
resignation to inevitable evils being a lesson he had had much
opportunity to learn, submitted with a good grace, though very much of
opinion that fires in a church were an absurdity and a waste. The
stoves were provided, and an uncommonly full attendance the next
Sabbath showed the very general interest the matter had excited. How
would it seem? Would any one faint?

There was by no means a superabundance of heat; there was something
wrong, but the lack of warmth was a hundred-fold made up in smoke. No
one could see across the church, and the minister loomed up, as if in
a dense fog; all eyes were fountains of tears. At last the old sexton
went with a slow and subdued step up to the pulpit, and, wiping his
eyes, respectfully inquired, in a whisper, whether there was not a
_little_ too much smoke. This suggestion being very smilingly assented
to, he proceeded to extinguish the fires, and for that day the
services were not indebted to artificial warmth to promote their
effect.

How sad are improvements in places to which our childish recollections
cling! The gushing fulness of unchilled love is lavished even on
inanimate and senseless things, in a happy childhood. How was my heart
grieved when the old-fashioned meeting-house was converted into the
modern temple! Time and decay had rendered the tall spire unsafe, yet
its fall by force and premeditated purpose seemed a sacrilege. I felt
affronted for the huge weathercock, reclining sulkily against a fence,
no more to point his beak to the east with obstinate preference. I
mourned over the broad, old-fashioned dial, on which young eyes could
discern the time a mile off. The old sexton lived to see this change,
and at the end of half a century of care under that venerable roof he
went to his rest. The beloved minister, and many, many who sat with
trustful and devoted hearts under his teachings, are gone to their
reward. A board from the old pulpit, a piece of the red-damask
curtain, and the long wished-for gold vase, are now in my possession.




"SOMETHING THAN BEAUTY DEARER."


  You ask me if her eyes are fair,
    And touched with heaven's own blue,
  And if I can her cheek compare
    To the blush-rose's hue?

  Her clear eye sheds a constant gleam
    Of truth and purest love,
  And wit and reason from it beam,
    Like the light of the stars above.
  Good-humor, mirth, and fancy throng
    The dimples of her cheek,
  And to condemn the oppressor's wrong
    Her indignant blush doth speak.

  You ask me if her form is light
    And graceful as the fawn;
  You ask me if her tresses bright
    Are like the golden dawn?

  Her step is light on an errand of love,
    Scarce doth she touch the earth,
  And in graceful kindness doth she move
    Around her father's hearth;
  And when to bless his child he bends,
    His comfort and delight,
  The silver with her dark hair blends,
    Like a crown of holy light.




A TALE

FOUND IN THE REPOSITORIES OF THE ABBOTS OF THE MIDDLE AGES.


Swept from his saddle by a low branch, Count Robert lay stunned upon
the ground. The hunting-party swept on, the riderless steed galloping
wildly among them. No man turned back; not one loved the Count better
than his sport.

There came to the spot a man in a woodman's garb, yet of a knightly
and noble aspect. He bent over the fallen man, and bathed his temples,
turning back the heavy, clustering locks. The Count, opening his eyes,
gazed on him at first without surprise; he thought himself at home,
however he came there, so familiar was the face.

Then did the woodman embrace him with tears, crying, "My brother, O my
brother! it is I! it is Richard!"

"Thou in England!" cried the Count. "Art thou mad?" And he frowned
gloomily.

"Fear not for me," replied the exile, tenderly raising the Count from
the ground.

A narrow path wound through the wood to a ruined hermitage. The outlaw
here prepared a bed of leaves for the Count, laid him softly thereon,
and went to seek some refreshment. His loved brother might revive, and
yet smile kindly on the playmate of his youth, though under a ban.

When Richard returned, there followed him like a dog a horse of the
North-country breed, shaggy, and in size not much greater than a
stag-hound. Robert viewed him with surprise, and it seemed with
derision.

"Despise not him who is able to bear thee out of the wood," said
Richard. "Thou art faint; here is wine, and of no mean vintage."

Robert drank from the earthen bottle, and his eye grew brighter, yet
looked it not the more lovingly on Richard. He ate right gladly of the
store of the landless and penniless,--dried venison and oaten
bread,--and was refreshed, yet thanked him not. Richard gave fragments
to the neighing steed. He ate no morsel himself, nor tasted the
wine. His heart was full to bursting.

"Tell me of home,--of--of our father," he said, at last, with deep,
strong sobs.

"On the morrow, on the morrow," said Robert, disposing himself for
sleep. "Thou wilt hear soon enough."

But Richard seized him wildly by the shoulder, and bade him tell the
worst.

"Nay, then, if thou _wilt_ know, he is dead. I, thy younger brother,
am now thy superior."

"For that I care not. As well thou, as I, to sit in my father's
seat. But oh! left he no blessing for me? Did he not at the last
believe me the victim of calumny?--Alas! No word? Not one dying
thought of Richard?"

"He died suddenly."

Richard wept long and bitterly, and when, with faltering tongue, he
asked tidings of his betrothed, his face was covered; he saw not the
guilty flush upon his brother's brow, for that he had spread a lying
report of the exile's death.

"Would Bertha still brave the king's displeasure? Was she yet true to
the unfortunate?"

"Bertha is a very woman. She hath forgotten the absent lover, and
chosen another, and a better man."

"Who, who hath supplanted me?" cried Richard fiercely, and springing
upon his feet.

"I tell thee not, lest thou wreak on him thy spite against thy
faithless fair."

"Know that Bertha's choice, though a traitor, is safe from me, even
were I, as I was, a man to meet a knight on equal terms."

His generous heart could not dream of fraternal treachery. And when
his rival saw this, and that he suspected him not as yet, he smiled to
himself, turned his face to the wall, and closed his eyes, if so be he
might cut off further question. Soon, falling into slumber, he
clenched his hands, and ground his teeth. The sleep of a traitor is
ever haunted by uneasy dreams, and dark shadows of coming doom fell
upon his spirit.

Richard watched till dawn. Sometimes he started up to walk to and fro,
beating his bosom, and wringing his hands in agony. Anon he threw
himself prostrate in the stupor of despair. At the first carol of
birds in the forest, sleep surprised his weary senses, and the peace
of the innocent settled upon his features.

Side by side lay the brothers, alike in form, alike even in
feature. But in heart they bore no mark of the resemblance of kindred.
Envy of the elder-born early possessed the soul of Robert, like a base
fiend; first had it driven thence love, and lastly honor.

Does no one seek for the absent lord of the castle, while the weary
hunters return to be his guests? Keeps no one anxious vigil, the
live-long night? The unloving is not loved. But he hath a king beneath
his roof; a king and lords of high degree sit at the morning board,
and shall none but vassals be hospitably proud and busy?

Ladies of rank were there, and among them, pale and silent, sat
Bertha, looking on the king, it seemed, with an upbraiding eye. An
angry gloom sat upon his grimly compressed lips, and sadness was upon
his brow; for kingly power was naught, since remorse could not undo a
wrong done to one who no longer lived, and vengeance could not reach
its absent object. Richard's innocence had come to light, and Robert,
albeit he knew it not, was now the dishonored outlaw.

Ere the clock of the distant minster rung the hour of ten, the royal
cavalcade wound from the gates of the castle. At the same hour Count
Robert awoke, and saw that the sun was already very high. It shone
upon the calm face of Richard, tempered with quivering shadows from
the leafy canopy above.

"Up, brother Richard!" cried the Count; "thou wast ever a sluggard."
And Richard, at his bidding, filled his hunting-pouch with provisions
for the way, and went before, leading the little Northern nag, which
the Count bestrode. He bore himself bravely under the weight of a
rider whose feet nearly grazed the turf on each side.

Slowly they wound through the tangled wood. "Stay, I will lighten thy
burden for thee," said Robert, "if thou hast not left the bottle
behind. Here's to the fair Bertha. What, thou wilt not drink? Then
thou hast resigned her;--she is not worth a thought. Thou wilt not
peril thy life to see her again, the false one who careth not for
thee. Now depart, and when the king's wrath is overpast, I will
beseech him for thee. Leave thy cause in a brother's hands." But
Richard went not back, though, when they came to the edge of the wood,
they beheld the king's train advancing in the broad highway.

"Fly, Richard; escape while thou mayest!"  cried Robert, yet offered
he not the horse for the greater speed.  "Found on English ground,
thou diest a felon's death. Disgrace not thy family. Carest thou not
for life?" he cried, pursuing Richard, who stinted not, nor stayed, at
the sight of the king, but the rather hasted forward.

"What is life to me?" said Richard. "Let the king do with me as he
will." He strode onward proudly, with folded arms, offering himself to
the view of Edward, who as yet saw him not, or only as a forester.

"Halt at least that I may spur on and implore for thee," said Robert,
for he hoped that he might deliver him a prisoner to some one in
attendance, that he should not come to speech of the king.

With this wily purpose, he galloped forward. A shout arose, "The
traitor! The traitor!" He was made prisoner by no gentle hands, and,
at a nod from the king, found himself led away to the rear, but not
far removed.

He looked about for Richard. Could he not yet wave him back?  Should
the king see that noble face, he must be moved to mercy, at least so
far as to give him audience. The brothers know not yet that all is
reversed. Robert sees a man in russet clothing kneel at the king's
stirrup; he sees the royal hand extended to raise him; he sees many
press forward eager to welcome the wanderer. He turns away, sick at
the sight.

One look more. Bertha has thrown herself into the arms of his hated
brother. He tears his beard; he curses his own natal day, and the
stars that presided over his birth and destiny.

Yet must he look once more, though to an envious soul the sight of a
brother's happiness is like the torment of purgatorial fire.  Richard
is standing with his hand extended towards him. He is pleading the
cause of the mean and cowardly enemy who betrayed him. He pities and
forgives him; he even loves him still, for is he not his brother?  As
the eyes of the king and of all the surrounding crowd are turned on
him, burning shame subdues the warring passions that fill the heart of
Robert, and a faint emotion of gratitude brings a tear to fall upon
his hot cheek. Something of old, childish love awakes in his bosom,
like dew in a dry land.

The king granted Richard's prayer, the more readily because his anger
was smothered by contempt. The title and inheritance returned to the
heir, who was worthy his ancient name.  Robert, to the day of his
death, lived on his brother's bounty, harmless, the rather that the
king's decree had gone forth that in no case should he be Richard's
successor, or inherit aught from him.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE.--Here ends the tale, but by patient research we have discovered
one verse of an ancient ballad, supposed to have the same tradition
for its subject. It is preserved in a curious collection of
fragmentary poetry, to be found in most private libraries, and, in its
more ancient and valuable editions, in the repositories of
antiquaries. It stands, in the modern copy which we possess, as
follows:--

  Richard and Robert were two pretty men;
  Both laid abed till the clock struck ten.
  Up jumps Robert, and looks at the sky;
  "Oho, brother Richard, the sun's very high!
  You go before, with the bottle and bag,
  And I'll come behind, on little Jack nag."




THE SEA.

    "We sent him to school, we set him to learn a trade, we sent
     him far back into the country; but it was of no use, he must
     go to sea."--THE GRANDMOTHER'S STORY.


  A child was ever haunted by a thought of mystery,
  Of the dark, shoreless, desolate, heaving and moaning sea,
  Which round about the cold, still earth goes drifting to and fro,
  As a mother, holding her dead child, swayeth herself with woe.
  In all the jar and bustle and hurrying of trade,
  Through the hoarse, distracting din by rattling pavements made,
  There sounded ever in his ear a low and solemn moan,
  And his soul grew sick with listening to that deep undertone.
  He wandered from the busy streets, he wandered far away,
  To where the dim old forest stands, and in its shadows lay,
  And listened to the song it sang; but its murmurs seemed to be
  The whispered echo of the sad, sweet warbling of the sea.
  His soul grew sick with longing, and shadowy and dim
  Seemed all the beauty of the land, and all its joys, to him,--
  Its mountains vast, its forests old. He only longed to be
  Away upon the measureless, unfathomed, restless sea.
  Thither he went. The foam-capped waves yet beat upon the strand,
  With a low and solemn murmuring that none may understand;
  And he lieth drifting to and fro, amid the ocean's roar,
  With the drifting tide he loved to hear, but shall hear never more.

    And thus we all are haunted,--there soundeth in our ear,
  A low and restless moaning, that we struggle not to hear.
  Yet still it soundeth, the faint cry of the dark deeps of the soul,--
  Dark, barren, restless, as the sea which doth for ever roll
  Hither and thither, bearing still some half-shaped form of good,
  The flickering shadow of the moon upon the "moon-led flood."
  And ever, 'mid all the joys and weary cares of life,
  Through the dull sleep of sluggishness, and clangor of the strife,
  We hear the low, deep murmuring of that Infinity
  Which stretcheth round us dim and vast, as wraps the earth the sea.
  And in the twilight dimness, in silence and alone,
  The soul is almost startled by the power of its solemn tone.
  When we view the fairest works of Nature and of Art,
  They ever fill with longings, never satisfy, the heart;
  But, like the lines of weed and shells that stretch along the beach,
  And show how far the flowing tide and the high waters reach,
  They seem like barriers to hold back, like weedy lines, to show
  How far into this busy world the waves of beauty flow.
  Yet when sweet strains of music rise about us, float, and play,
  We almost dream these barriers of sense are broken away,
  And that the beauty bound before is floating round us, free
  As the bright, glancing waters of the ever-playing sea.
  And for a little moment, the spirit seems to stand
  With naked, wave-washed feet almost upon the strand.
  But when she stoops to reach the wave, the waters glide away,
  And whisper in an unknown tongue,--she hears not what they say.




FASHION.


Why is it that the introduction of a really graceful fashion is
generally met with ridicule and opposition, while ugly modes are
adopted with grave acquiescence and reverent submission?

"Seest thou not what a deformed thief this _Fashion_ is?" "I know that
Deformed; he goes up and down like a gentleman." Yes, we all know
_Deformed_. When any of his family come to us, from England or France
or any foreign country, we recognize the hideous brotherhood, and
extend our welcoming hands; but _Graceful_ must stay with us a long
time to be greeted kindly, and her sisters from foreign parts are
coldly looked upon, or dismissed at once.

To begin at the top,--"the very head and front of the offending."  A
gentleman goes into a fashionable hatter's, and the shopman, holding
up for admiration a hat with a crown a foot high, of the genuine
stove-pipe form, and a brim an inch wide, says, "This is the newest
style, Sir." The gentleman walks home with the ugly thing on his head,
but no one stares or laughs. 'Tis a new fashion, but all "take it
easy." A year later, perhaps, the hatter shows him a thing with a brim
a half an inch wider, but rolled up at the sides, and a crown of a
much greater diameter at the top than where it joins the brim,--a
specimen of the bell-crown. This is solemnly donned, and the wearer
has the pleasure of knowing that the head-gear of all his friends is
as hideous as his own. The inverted cone is worn with a sweet,
Malvolio smile. And so "Deformed" has ruled the head of man for as
many years as any of us can number, only ringing the changes, from one
year to another, upon the three degrees of comparison of the word
_ugly_.

But a change takes place; a light, graceful, low-crowned hat, with a
brim wide enough for shelter or for shade, begins to appear as a
fashion;--and how is it received? The clergyman thinks it would be
very unclerical for him to wear it, though it may be as black, and is
as modest, as the rest of his apparel. The young doctor timidly tries
it on, and in his first walk meets the wealthy hypochondriac, his
favorite patient, and the one who is trying to introduce him to
practice, who seriously advises him, as a friend, not to wear that
new-fangled thing,--if the poor hat had only been ugly, there would
have been nothing bad in its _new-fangled_ quality,--as all his
respectable patients will leave him if he dresses so like a fool. The
young lawyer gets one, because he heard an old lady speak of "those
impudent-looking hats," and he is in hopes that impudence, which he
understands is all-important in his profession, and which he is
conscious of not possessing, may come with the hat. A lady goes out
with her son, who is just old enough to have gained a coat, and is
looking for his first hat. The mother has taste and judgment, and the
youth has yet some unperverted affinity with graceful forms left, and
so they choose and buy one of these comfortable and elegant
chapeaux. Just before they reach home, they meet one of their best
friends, a person whom the lady regards most kindly, and the young man
admires and respects, and _he_ greets him with, "Why, Tom! have _you_
got one of those rowdy hats?" And so the stiff, stove-pipe monstrosity
keeps its place, and the only pleasant, sensible, graceful, becoming
hat that the nineteenth century has known, is called all sorts of bad
names, and quiet gentlemen are afraid to wear it.

Has it not been the fate of the shawl, too, the most simple and
elegant wrapper, and comfortable withal, that a man can throw around
him, to be scouted and flouted?

Yes, Deformed! Come on next winter with a white surtout in your hand
that must fit so tightly that your victims can but just screw
themselves into it, with a stiff, square collar touching the ears, and
seven capes, one over the other, "small by degrees and beautifully
less," and all respectable gentlemen will accept it, and virtuously
frown down, as dandies or rowdies, those who will not sacrifice their
shawls to the ugly idol.




A GROWL.


I know it is generally considered decidedly boorish to utter
complaints against the ladies. But I am for the present a bachelor,
and in that capacity claim freedom of speech as my peculiar privilege.
In virtue of my unhappy position, then, I proceed to utter the first
of a series of savage growls, wishing the ladies to understand me as
fully in earnest in this; that when I growl _loud_, I must be supposed
to _mean_ what I growl.

For a month past, single gentlemen of every description have suffered
in common with other fancy stocks, and have remained hopelessly below
par. Those nice, trim, poetical, and polite young beaux, who, when no
great undertaking agitates the female mind, are treated with kindness,
and sometimes with distinction, by young ladies of discretion, are
now, as it were, ruthlessly thrust and bolted out of the pale of
feminine society by an awful demon who reigns supreme,--the Genius of
Dress-making. The other evening, I pulled sixteen different
bell-handles, in a gentlemanly manner, without obtaining admission
into any house for the purpose of making a call; and when I succeeded
in making an entrance at the seventeenth door by falsely representing
myself as the agent of a dry-goods dealer, with a large box of
patterns under my arm, I found the ladies in close conference with
three dress-makers, studying a fashion-plate with an assiduity worthy
of a better cause. A friend of mine, who has hitherto enjoyed the
privilege of dining every day with six ladies, and has derived from
their society great pleasure and profit, informed me yesterday, with a
tear in each eye, that he had left the house for ever, the
conversation being always turned upon topics with which he is utterly
unacquainted, and conducted in a language which is about as
intelligible to him as the most abstruse Japanese or the most classic
Law-Latin.

If we are so fortunate as to obtain, by any stratagem, admission to
hall or anteroom, in the mansions of our fair friends, our olfactories
are regaled with a fragrance which we instinctively associate with
tailors' shops, and which, I am informed, does in fact arise from the
contact of woollen substances with hot flat-irons. As we advance, our
ears are greeted by the resounding clash of scissors. Entering upon
the field of action, our eyes are dazzled by a thousand fragments of
rich and brilliant hues, and our personal safety endangered by swiftly
flying needles and unsuspected pins. Gossip is at an end, for the
thread must be continually bitten off. Dancing is child's play, a
folly of the past. The piano is converted into a table, or an
ironing-board. No games can be suggested but Thread-my-needle, and
Thimble-rig. No books are at hand but Harper, with the fashion-plate
at the end; the newspapers of the day are cut into uncouth shapes; and
conversation (when conducted in English) hangs the unsuccessful
Bloomer reform upon the gibbet of ridicule.

Now, if we would prevent utter disunion in society, something like a
compromise must be effected, and to the ladies belongs the laboring
oar. I use a metaphor which implies that they must do something they
are little accustomed to do; they must make some concession. We have
done all we could do, and I will make one statement which will
convince the world that we bachelors are not obstinate without good
reason. I confess (though it is not without some slight degree of
shame that I own it), that I have, during the last week, consumed the
greater part of every day in ineffectual study, trying to perfect
myself in the terminology of the science of Fashion. I have listened
attentively, and have gathered into a retentive memory sundry
technicalities; but in vain have I submitted these terms of a strange
dialect to the strictest etymological research. In vain have I
conversed upon this subject with the most intelligent dry-goods
dealers. In learning the few idiomatic phrases they employ, I have
experienced only the satisfaction which young students in Greek
literature feel, when they have, with infinite labor, mastered the
_alphabet_ of that rich and copious language.

But there is hope. Experience tells us, this state of things cannot
last for ever. A few weeks, and our sufferings shall be rewarded, our
forbearance repaid. Then shall gay streamers, pendent from rejuvenated
bonnets, float, as of yore, across our promenades, and on the
shoulders of Earth's fairest daughters the variegated mantle be again
displayed. The streets, now deserted by the fair, will ere long
glitter with the brilliant throng, and our sidewalks be swept once
more by the gracefully flowing silk. Taper fingers shall
condescendingly be extended to us, the smile of beauty beam on us, and
witty speech banish our resentful remembrance of incomprehensible
jargon.




TO JENNY LIND,

ON HEARING HER SING THE ARIA "ON MIGHTY PENS," FROM "THE CREATION."


  When Haydn first conceived that air divine,
  The voice that thrilled his inward ear was thine.
  The Lark, that even now to heaven's gate springs,
  And near the sky her earth-born carol sings,
  Poured on his ear a higher, purer note,
  And heavenly rapture seemed to swell her throat.
  To him, from groves of Paradise, the Dove
  Breathed Eden's innocence and Eden's love;
  And seraph-taught seemed the enchanting lay
  The Nightingale poured forth at close of day;
  For yet nor sin nor sorrow had its birth,
  To touch, as now, the sweetest sounds of earth.
  Yes! as upon his inner sense was borne
  The melody of that primeval morn,
  And all his soul was music,--O, to him
  The voice of Nature was an angel's hymn!
    But was there, _then_, one human voice that brought
  Unto his outward ear his own rapt thought,
  In tones, interpreting in worthy guise
  The varied notes of Eden's melodies?--
  O, happier we! for unto us 'tis given
  To hear, through thee, the strains he caught from heaven.

December 1, 1851.




MY HERBARIUM.


Poor, dry, musty flowers! Who would believe you ever danced in the
wind, drank in the evening dews, and spread sweet fragrance on the
air? A touch now breaks your brittle leaves. Your odors are like attic
herbs, or green tea, or mouldy books. Your forms are bent and
flattened into every ugly and distorted shape. Your lovely colors are
faded,--white changed to black, yellow to dirty white, gorgeous
scarlet to brick color, purple to muddy brown. Poor things! Who drew
you from your native woods and brooks, to press you flat, and dry your
moisture up, and paste you down helplessly upon your backs, such
mocking shadows of your former grace and beauty?

Ah! sorrowfully do I confess it! It was I. In my early years I
searched the woods and meadows, scaled rocks, forded bogs, and
scrutinized each shady thicket, with murderous intent. I bore my
drooping victims home, and sacrificed them relentlessly to
science. With my own hand I turned the screw that crushed out all that
was lovely and graceful and delicate about them. How I wearied myself
over that flower-press! How anxiously I watched over the stiff stalks
and shrivelled leaves,--all that was left! How perseveringly I changed
and dried the papers, jammed my fingers between the heavy boards, and
blistered my hands with that obstinate screw! And how cordially I
hated it all! I liked the fun of gathering the flowers, the triumph of
finding new specimens, and the excitement of hazardous scrambles; but
as for the rest it was drudgery, which I went through only from a
stern sense of duty. Now, thanks to the busy little fingers that
passed over these leaves, I have a fund of amusement laid up for me;
for every page has its story, and each mutilated flower is the centre
of a beautiful picture. Here the ludicrous and the pathetic are so
exquisitely blended, that I laugh with a regretful feeling at my
heart, and sigh even when smiles are on my face. The first few pages
are light and joyous, full of a child's warm impulses and ready zeal,
and enlivened here and there by some roguish caprice. That was the
time when, in my simplicity, I loved dandelions and buttercups, and
could see beauty even in the common white-weed of the fields. Ah!
here they are, arranged in whimsical positions,--Clover and Sorrel,
Violets and Blue-eyed Grass, Peppergrass and Dock (O, how hard
that was to press!), Mouse-Ear and Yarrow, Shepherd's Purse,
Buttercups, and full-blown Dandelion, Succory, and Chickweed, and
Gill-run-over-the-ground,--with their homeliest names written in
sprawling characters, all down hill, beneath them. I did not aspire to
botanical names in those days. I thought nothing was unfit for my new
Herbarium. Such was my zeal, that I believe I should have filled it
entirely in a few days, if I had not been counselled to make a
judicious selection. I had a faculty for bringing home plants
impossible to press, and insisting upon making the experiment. I slept
for a week with my bed-post tilted up on a huge book, wherein reposed
a water-lily, obstinately refusing to lie flat. All kinds of woody
plants, too, were my delight, though they invariably came out of the
press as they went in, except that the leaves were in every variety of
unnatural position. I never grew weary, either, of gathering stately
and graceful green ferns, and finding them all "cockled up," as the
phrase went, when I got home. I believe I made some experiments on a
horsechestnut blossom once; but as it is not to be found in my
Herbarium, I am inclined to think they were unsuccessful. How happy
children are with any new possession! I thought there never was any
thing quite equal to my new book. All the girls had them, with neat
marbled covers, and white paper within, and each one was determined to
make hers the best of the whole. When pasting day came, there was an
intense excitement. We all daubed our little fingers to our heart's
content, and our faces too, as to that.  I remember perfectly the
sensation of smiling, after the paste stiffened. We spattered our
desks, and pasted the wrong side of the flowers, and stuck the leaves
together, and got every thing a little one-sided, and, in short,
became so worried and heated and vexed, that we did not hunt for any
more flowers for a long time after the first pasting day.

In the mean while my ideas had undergone a change. I had become much
more ambitious. A hew page brings flowers of a higher order, and,
beneath them, besides the common name, appears a sounding botanical
title; ay, still more, the class and order are written in full. Poor
things! How many of your species must have been pulled to pieces by
inexperienced hands, to ascertain the exact number of stamens, and
their relative positions! I feel, now, a tenderness for the shrinking,
delicate wild flowers, that makes me hesitate even to pick them from
their shady retreats; but _then_, such was my ardor for investigation,
the more I loved them, and the more beautiful they seemed, the more
eagerly I tore them to fragments. Let the ingenious student analyze
bits of brass wire, and reduce to its simple elements as much
gunpowder as he pleases, but I raise my voice against this wanton
destruction of rare and beautiful flowers. No chemical process can
ever restore _them_.

As I glance over this new page, I see a merry troop of little girls,
crowding around their kind teacher, trying to restrain their
superabundant spirits, and restless activity, till they may give them
free scope in the woods. Passing up the street, they are joined by
fresh recruits, who come dancing out of the houses, with baskets, and
trowels, and tin boxes, and delightfully mysterious suppers packed
away nicely, to be eaten in the most romantic place that can be
found,--provided there is no danger of snakes, or ivy. Where they are
going I should find it impossible to say, until I have consulted the
new leaf just turned over. Here, side by side, are the wild Columbine
and the cheerful little Bethlehem Star. They grew, I remember, upon
Powder-House Hill, so named from the massive granite building upon its
summit, which we never dared to go near, for fear of an explosion. The
hill was rough, rocky, barren, and in some places quite steep. In the
clefts of the rocks, generally far above our reach, the bright red
columbines stood in groups, drooping their graceful heads. Some of the
rocks were worn to a perfect polish by the feet of daring sliders. It
was a dangerous pastime even to the most experienced. A loss of
balance, a slight deviation from the beaten track, a trip in a hollow,
or a momentary entanglement in your dress,--and you are lost! I
declined joining in the diversion ever after the first attempt, which
was nothing but a headlong plunge from top to bottom. But though I
heroically stood aloof while the girls were enjoying the sport, and
making the air ring with their laughter, I was sure, afterwards, to
come upon the slippery places unintentionally, and take a slide
whether I would or not. I had, I remember, a most unfortunate
propensity for climbing and scrambling, choosing the worst paths, and
daring the others to follow my lead on precarious footholds. It was
unfortunate, because I seldom came forth from these trials unscathed.
I was always tearing my dresses in clambering over fences, or bumping
my head in creeping under. Where others cleared brooks with a light
spring, I landed in the middle. I was sure to pick out spongy, oozy,
slippery grass to stand upon, in marshy land, or was yet more likely
to slump through over shoes in black mud. Banks always caved in
beneath my feet, unexpectedly. Brambles seemed to enter into a
conspiracy to lay violent hands on me, and hidden boughs lay in wait
to trip me up. Moss and bark scaled off the trunks of fallen trees,
bearing me with it when I was least on my guard, or the trunks
themselves, solid enough to all appearance, crushed to powder beneath
my unwary tread. Even the stone walls deserted me.  I made use of one
as a bridge, one day, to reach a golden cowslip that grew temptingly
in a swamp; but a treacherous stone rolled off with me, and a perfect
avalanche of huge rocks followed, splashing the muddy water all over
me as I sat, helplessly, buoyed up by the tall grass. I regret to say,
I forgot the cowslip.




THE OSTRICH.


  Of the wild and wayward Ostrich, say, have ye never heard?
  Of the poor, distracted, lonely, outcast, and wandering bird?
  Which is not a bird of heaven, nor yet a beast of earth,
  But ever roveth, homeless,--a creature of strange birth.
  Wings hath it, but it flies not. And yet within its breast
  Are strange and sleepless drivings, so that it may not rest;
  Half-formed, half-conscious impulses, with its half-formed pinions
        given,
  Too strong for rest on earth, too weak to bear to heaven;--
  And madly it beats its wings, but vainly, against its side,
  For the light wind rusheth through them, mocking them in its pride.
  Then, distraught, it hurries onward, the gates of heaven shut,
  Flying from what it knows not,--seeking it knows not what.
  While in the parching desert, amid the stones and sand,
  Its stone-like eggs are lying, here and there, on every hand,
  It wanders on, unheeding; and, with funereal gloom,
  Trembles in every breeze each torn, dishevelled plume.
  And when, with startled terror, it sees its foes around,
  It strives to rise above them, but clingeth to the ground.
  Then on it madly rusheth, with idly fluttering wings;
  The stones in showers behind it convulsively it flings;
  Onward, and ever onward,--the fleetest horses tire,--
  But its strength grows less and less, their tramping ever nigher.
  The poor distracted thing! it feels its lonely birth;
  It may not rise to heaven, so it cometh to the earth;
  To the earth, as to a mother, since to the earth it must,--
  Its head in her bosom nestled, its eye veiled with her dust.
  But she will not receive it. From earth and heaven outcast,
  The Ostrich dies, as it lived, unfriended to the last.

    Of the wild and wayward Ostrich, say, have ye never heard?
  Of the poor, distracted, lonely, outcast, and wandering bird?

    But not alone it wandereth. My spirit stirs in me,
  With a sort of half-fraternal and drawing sympathy;
  This lonely, restless spirit, that would rise from the heavy ground
  To the sky of light and love that stretcheth all around.
  But, with all its restless longings, it too must earth-bound stay,
  And, with wings half formed for soaring, here hold its weary way,
  Hungering for food of heaven, feeding on dust and stone,
  While about it lie unheeded, as it hasteth on alone,
  Its deeds of good or evil, a fruitful mystery;
  But it presseth on, nor recketh what their event may be.
  And when doubt and fear assail it, it may not rise above
  To the glorious, peaceful height of fear-outcasting love;
  But something draws it downward, breathes of its lower birth,
  Prompts it to seek a refuge in the blindness of the earth.
  And it hides its head in earthliness; at least it will not see
  The blow it cannot ward off; and the foe it may not flee.
  But something softly whispers that these wings shall grow to soar--
  Heaven grant!--in the cloudless depths of love for evermore.
  It whispers that again these blinded eyes shall see;
  Heaven grant in their yearning gaze the long-sought home may be!
  It whispers each word and act shall to fruition spring;
  Heaven grant they may joy to man, and peace to the spirit bring!

    Of the wild and wandering Ostrich, say, have ye never heard?
  The type of the restless soul of man, the weary, wingless bird.




COWS.


I admire cows in their proper places. They are undoubtedly useful
animals; some may think them handsome and graceful: this is, as yet,
an unsettled question. They certainly figure pretty extensively in all
sketches of rural scenery, and may, therefore, be considered as
picturesque objects; but I think that on canvas they take to
themselves beauties which they do not possess in actual life. I do not
object to see them at a distance, quietly grazing in a meadow by the
brink of a winding stream, and all that sort of thing, provided the
distance is very great, and a strong fence intervenes. For I would
have you know, that I am a delicate young lady of nervous temperament
and keen sensibilities, and have a mortal dread of cows. I am not used
to the customs of country life, which place this animal on a level
with domestic pets, and when my brother asked me to pat the side of
one of these great, coarse brutes, I screamed at the mere idea. For I
should be extremely unwilling to provoke one of them, because I have
been told that, when heated with passion, as these beasts often are,
it sometimes happens that the powder-horns on top of their heads
explode, and spread ruin and desolation around.  People here bestow a
vast deal too much consideration on these unpleasant animals, for they
are often seen--that is, those of them that are troubled with weak
eyes--walking along the streets with boards over their faces, as a
protection from the rays of the sun. I don't believe that is the real
reason of the thing, though my brother assures me that it is. I think,
myself, that it is intended as a keen satire upon those young ladies
who wear veils in the streets; but I never will yield my point. I
_will_ wear my veil, so long as I have a complexion worth protecting,
and so long as there are gentlemen worth cutting. The Brighton Bridge
Battery is a delightful promenade on a warm summer's day, it is _so_
shady; but it is closed, I may say, every Wednesday and Thursday, to
accommodate these detestable pets of the public. It seems, as my
brother informs me, that the drovers, from humane considerations, are
in the habit of driving their cattle over to Brighton, (when the
weather is pleasant,) and back again on the next day, in order that
their health may be improved by the sea-air which blows up Charles
River. Now I think that when the cow takes precedence of the lady, and
usurps, to the utter exclusion of the latter, the most delightful
promenade in Cambridge, it is time the city authorities should look to
it; and so I told my brother. He considered for a moment, and then
advised me not to bear it any longer, but to go upon Brighton Bridge,
_in spite_ of the cows, and assert my independence. I followed his
advice, as I always do, and, on one fine afternoon, took advantage of
the pleasant weather to indulge in a solitary walk in that
direction. As I was sauntering along on the wooden sidewalk, gazing at
the noble ships which lay moored by their gaff-topsails to the
abutments of the bridge, and viewing the honest sailors as they
promenaded up and down the string-ladders at the command of their
captains, my fears were aroused by a distant commotion. I hastily
turned and looked over the railing into the street. A whole drove of
infuriated cows, urged on by two fiendish boys and a savage dog, was
rapidly approaching me from the Cambridge side. What should I do? I
was too much fatigued to run, and I had never learned to swim. My
plans were hastily formed. Flinging my red silk visite and sky-blue
parasolette into the water, lest the gay colors should still more
enrage the wild animals, I jumped over the outside railing towards the
river, and hung by one arm over the angry flood during a moment of
speechless agony!  On they came, with lightning speed, in a whirlwind
of dust. A rapid succession of earthquakes--bellowings--groans,--and
all was over. I was safe. On inspection of the footmarks, I felt quite
sure that some of them must have approached within ten yards of me,
and only two railings had intervened between me and their fury.

An honest tar from one of the men-of-war employed in unloading coal at
Willard's Wharf took the captain's gig, and made for my parasol and
visite as they floated away, and returned them with the very
unintelligible remark, that I'd "better not clear the wreck next time
unless it blew more of a breeze."




THE HOME-BEACON.


  By Elkton wood, where gurgling flood
    Impels the foamy mill,
  Where quarries loom, in solemn gloom,
    A mansion crowns the hill.

  A pharos true, light ever new
    Streams through its friendly pane,
  To guide and greet benighted feet
    Which thread the winding lane.

  Lofty and lone, that light has shone,
    Alike o'er green or snow,
  Since first a pair their nest built there,
    Two hundred years ago.

  Now, as we walk, with pleasant talk
    To cheer the dismal way,
  That light shall tell of marriage-bell,
    Of moon and merry sleigh.

  The ancient home to which we come
    These scenes revealed one night;
  As the beacon true, so old, yet new,
    Flung wide its cheery light.

  Go back threescore long years, or more:
    Old Time the latch shall lift,
  And, from his urn, once more return
    The home of love and thrift.

  A noble sire, with nerves of wire,
    Warm heart, and open hand,--
  A worthy dame, nor shrewd, nor tame,--
    Lead forth the phantom band;

  Three girls, three boys, with fun and noise,
    Next gather round the hearth;
  Reenter, then, dear friends, again
    All full of life and mirth.

  "My pretty nuns, 't is late! My sons,
    Bring out the 'Sliding Car.'
  For one fair bride, you all must ride
    The snows both fast and far."

  First darts away the bridegroom gay,
    Nor waits the well-aimed jest:
  To shed and stall they follow, all,
    To speed their sire's behest.

  In full array, the spacious sleigh
    Glides through the pillared gate:
  Each prancing steed, straining to lead,
    Draws no unwilling mate.

  Full moon and bright loops up the night
    Above the starry sky.
  Runner and heel, well shod with steel,
    Cut sharply as they fly.

  Along they go, o'er sparkling snow,
    Shrill bells to song oft ringing;
  By oak and birch, to Gladstone church
    A bridal party bringing.

  On time-worn walls the moonbeam falls,
    And silvers o'er the spire,
  While diamond-pane and giddy vane
    Repeat the heavenly fire.

  From lofty tower to maiden's bower,
    And wide o'er hill and dell,
  Of earthly heaven, to mortals given,
    Sweet chimes the marriage-bell.

  With open book, and solemn look,
    All robed in priestly lawn,
  The Rector stands,--but counts the sands,
    Right willing to be gone!

  (The evening mail and nut-brown ale,
    His pipe and rocking-chair,
  Are waiting long, while the bridal throng
    Still lingers unaware.)

  An ancient gloom fills all the room,
    And dims the lamps above,
  Though wall and aisle in verdure smile,
    Through wreath and Christmas grove.

  By branching pines and graceful vines,
    Slow glides the youthful pair
  To the altar green, with brow serene,
    And kneel together there.

  Soft breathes the vow, responsive now,
    In calm but earnest tone.
  The wedding-ring, strange, mystic thing!
    Fast binds the twain in one.

  The solemn word no longer heard,
    With chastened steps and slow,
  And heart in heart, no more to part,
    To "Home, sweet Home," they go.

  Fresh now, again, o'er snowy main,
    The winged steeds return:
  On roughening rock, with shriek and shock,
    The flashing runners burn.

  O'er cradling drift, secure though swift,--
    Now smooth, now rough, the track,--
  The furious sleigh devours the way,
    As lash and harness crack.

  Through furs and wool, the air, so cool,
    Is felt or feared no more;
  Though gay the steeds with icy beads,
    And their flanks are frosted o'er.

  A fitful light, scarce yet in sight,
    Gleams through the opening wood:
  Ah! now they come to their hill-side home,
    In merry, merry mood.

  Four lovely girls, a string of pearls,
    Are found in place of three:
  Four daughters fair are gathered there
    Around the Christmas-tree.

  As roars the fire, their loving sire
    A warmer welcome deals;
  And, stooping low, on one fair brow
    His heart's adoption seals.

  A dearer bliss, a mother's kiss,
    Awaits the blushing bride:
  One look above! then smiles of love
    Express her joy and pride.

  Once more good cheer removes the tear,
    Returns the joyous smile;
  Soon laughter, poured around the board,
    Rings through the spacious pile.

  While dance and song employ them long,
    Steals in the cold, gray dawn!
  Back to your urn, ye phantoms, turn,
    And vanish o'er the lawn.

  Stern, though in tears, with Fatal shears,
    Time scattered all those pearls!
  They fell, unstrung, old graves among;
    O'er all the snow-wreath curls!

  Yet shines that light from lattice bright,
    Wide o'er the grass, or snow;
  Still all the room its rays illume,
    As when, so long ago,

  Its arrowy star recalled the car
    Then winding round the wood,
  And lime-rock gray threw back the ray
    Across the rapid flood.

  Though cold each form, their _love_, still warm,
    From hearth and lattice glows:
  Hearts kind and dear yet linger here,
    And bid us to repose.

  The skies are dark! No moonbeams mark
   Or wall, or traveller's way:
  O'er rock and wood thick storm-clouds brood,
    And doubts our steps delay.

  No beacon-light yet cheers the night:
    How gloomy grows the hour!
  Ah! there it shines, in lance-like lines,
    Sharp through the misty shower.

  Shine on, fair star, through storms, afar!
    Still bless the nightly way!
  Always the same, a vestal flame,
    Love shall maintain thy ray.




THE FOURTH OF JULY.


It was the anniversary of our Glorious Fourth. The evil genius who
specially presides over the destinies of unoffending college boys put
it into the heads of five of us to celebrate the day by an excursion
by water to Nahant Beach. The morning was delightful,--the cool summer
air just freshening into a steady and favoring breeze, the sun
tempered in his ferocity by an occasional cloud above us, the sea calm
and pleasant--and all that sort of thing, you know--just what you want
on such occasions,--and we set sail from Braman's, resolved to have "a
jolly good time." I can't describe our passage down. It was altogether
too full of fun to be written on one sheet. Suffice it to say, we
laughed, and sang, and joked, and ate, and drank ('t was when we were
young), and so on, all the way, and in fact I felt rather disappointed
at arriving so soon as we did at our destined port. Here new pleasures
awaited us, in the shape of acquaintances unexpected and unexpecting,
rides on the beach, bowling, and loafing in general,--much too rich to
be described here and now. But there is an end to all sport, and ours
came quite too soon. The shadows had begun to lengthen considerably
before we thought of starting on our return, and certain ominous
indications in the heavens above us warned us, that, as our passage
homewards was not by land, further delay was unadvisable.

Dolefully we set our sail, and made for Boston Harbor. We began to
feel the reaction which always follows a season of extreme joviality,
and our spirits were down. Our chief wit, Tom B----, who had before
kept us in a perpetual roar all the way, sat moody and desponding, and
answered gruffly every question put to him; speaking only when spoken
to, and then in monosyllables rarely used in polite circles. Our
_other_ joker, second only to Tom, the above named, having amused us
during the whole day by long yarns spun out from a varied experience
and a rich imagination, betook himself to slumber, and tried to dream
that he was safe home again. The rest of us performed our duties about
the boat in gloomy silence, looking occasionally with some anxiety at
the clouds gathering slowly over our heads, but keeping our opinions
within our own breasts. I had no apprehension of danger, for nothing
indicated a gale; in fact, the breeze was gradually deserting us. All
that was to be feared was a calm, steady rain, which, visiting us at a
distance of several miles from home, and late at night, promised any
thing but an agreeable conclusion to our day's excursion. At last it
came. First, a heavy drop, then a few more, and then a regular,
straight, old-fashioned pour.

Our sail hung motionless, and we seemed to stand still and take
it. Our companions were soon roused from their abstraction by the very
unpleasant circumstances, and we hastily took counsel together.

"Unship the mast," says Tom, "and over with your oars."

We obeyed our captain sulkily, and soon were moving on again. We
pulled away for an hour or so, drenched with the rain, which seemed to
come down faster than ever, and were about as miserable and down-cast
a pack of wretches as ever lived; for there is nothing like a good
ducking (to use the common expression) to take the life and spirit out
of a man, not to mention the other discomforts that attended our
situation.

Silently we rowed, and not a sound was heard above the plashing of the
rain upon the surface of the sea, and the regular stroke of the oars.

"It's very strange that we don't reach old Point Shirley," says Tom,
who had been on the look out for this landmark during the last
half-hour.

"Very strange," said we, and pulled away as before.

Thus passed another half-hour in silent, ceaseless occupation, when,
from the mere force of habit, I dipped my hand over the boat's
gunwale, with the hope of cooling my blistered palm in the salt water.
Judge of my surprise, when I found my hand immersed in _thick black
mud_.

"By Jove, fellows," cried I, "we're floored!"

There was no mistaking the fact; we were aground. At that instant the
moon burst out from between the drifting clouds, and, as if in
derision, threw a streak of light over our melancholy position. There
we were, high and dry on a bank of mud, a scooped furrow on each side
of us attesting the frantic efforts of our oarsmen to get a headway,
and a long wake, ten feet in extent, marking our distance from the sea
behind us. Such was our position as the moon revealed it to us. We
looked dolefully in one another's faces for three minutes; then a grim
smile gradually stole over Tom's expressive countenance, as he slowly
ejaculated, "Point Shirley it is!" when the ludicrous side of the
matter seemed to occur to each of us simultaneously, and we indulged
ourselves with a roar of laughter,--the first since we had left
Nahant.

Of course, nothing could be done under the circumstances; but we must
wait patiently for the rising of the tide to float us off. So we sat
there in our wet garments until the dead of night, when our boat
gradually lifted herself off and we started again, and finally arrived
at Braman's early in the morning.

The moral of this tale may be summed up in a single word,--TEMPERANCE.




FROM THE PAPERS OF REGINALD RATCLIFFE, ESQ.


In college I was the "Illustrious Lazy." In my professional studies
and avocations, I have been so hard driven, in order to make up for
four idle years, that I am wasted almost to a shadow, and fears are
entertained that I shall wholly vanish into thin air. My physician
talks gravely about my having exhausted my nervous energy, and sends
me to Ratborough, as the place of all others the most favorable for
entire intellectual repose. I am living with an old aunt, Tabitha
Flint, who was wont to rock me, and trot me, and wash my face, in my
helpless infancy, and can hardly yet be convinced that I have outgrown
such endearing assiduities in the twenty-five years that have
intervened. I let her pet me, so far as I find it convenient, and,
indeed, farther, because I feel grateful for the kind feelings of
which I am the object.

There is another personage in the household, who probably thinks that
in the exuberant kindness of my aunt I have a full average of
civility, without the least interest on her part. Do not for a moment
imagine that I am piqued at her insulting indifference of manner
towards a young man who (I beg you to believe) is not wholly without
claim to a glance of approbation now and then from a lady's eye. You
must not suppose I care at all about the matter. But as I have not
even a book allowed me to take up my thoughts, my curiosity fixes
itself strangely upon this silent, sulky, meditative little person,
who takes about as much notice of me as of the figure of Father Time
over the clock.

What can such a body have to think about the livelong day that is so
absorbing that all one's bright thoughts, and one's most whimsical
sallies, pass without notice? Should I see her once move a muscle of
her very plain, doggedly inexpressive, provokingly composed phiz, I
should jump up and cry, "Bo!" with surprise.

She vanishes several hours at a time, and I hear her humming to
herself, sometimes in one room, sometimes in another. I wish I knew
how she amuses herself, for I find self-amusement the hardest drudgery
I ever tried. I could stamp, I am so impatient of doing nothing but
lounge about; I am as snappish as a chained cur, as cross as a caged
bear. And while I gnaw my nails, and stretch, and yawn, I hear that
contented, bee-like murmur, and now and then a light, rapid step on
the stairs, or about rooms which I do not frequent. What can she find
to be so busy about, the absurd little person? how can she be so happy
in this dull house alone?

There is a piano, but as silent as she is. I do not see her wince,
though I drum upon the keys with most ingenious discords, and sing
false on purpose as loud as I can bellow. I will not ask her if she
can play; she can have no ear at all, or she would box mine in
self-defence.

There is somebody, by name Flora, who is looked for daily by
stage-coach. "Flory," says my aunt, "sings like a canary-bird, and
plays a sight,"--and _at sight_ too, it seems. This Miss Flora will be
found to possess a tongue, I hope, and the disposition to give it
exercise. I do not know certainly that Miss Etty--By the way, what is
her real name?  I won't condescend to ask any question about her. But
really, I wish I knew whether it is Mehitable. Perhaps Henrietta. No,
no, that is too pretty a name; I shall call her _Little Ugly_.

Hark! I have two or three times heard a very musical laugh in the
direction of the kitchen. Heigh-ho! How can any mortal laugh in
Ratborough! Having nothing better to do, I will go and see who this
very merry personage may be. I will inquire into this gay outbreak, in
a land of stupidity. Hark, again!--how refreshing! I must and will
know what caused such a gush of mirth. Irish humor, perhaps, for Norah
is laughing, after her guttural fashion, too.--

As I popped my head into the kitchen, Little Ugly was just vanishing
at the opposite door. I could not make Norah tell me what Miss Etty
put under her arm, as she looked over her shoulder at me, and darted
out of sight. O my noisy boots! I might as well wear a bell round my
neck.

Stage-wheels are rattling up the road. Now they run upon the grass
before the door. I rush in undignified haste to the window. Shall
I--will I--go and help this long-expected Miss Flora to alight?
No,--for I see forty boxes on the coach-top. A very handsome girl,
really! I will get out a blameless dickey,--if such there be. First
impressions are important. I wish my hair was cut!

I hear my aunt coming to inform me of Flora's arrival. I shall be
hugely surprised! Humph!--will it be worth while to trouble myself
about the lop-eared dickey? Little Ugly will be amused, if I do. She
_can_ laugh, it seems. I had thought there was no fun in her mental
composition. Yet I have imagined a glimmer or so in her eyes, when she
thought I was not looking at them, and the shadow of a dimple in her
cheek now and then.

Instead of Adonizing, I will set my long locks on end, and don my
slipshod slippers. "Yes, Aunt; I hear, good lady! I will presently
arrive, to make my bow to _Little Handsome_."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Journal, Sept. 23d_. Truly, the presence of Miss Flora Cooper makes
Willow Valley a new place. At least six hours are taken from the
length of the days, though I have given up my afternoon slumber, and
play chess and backgammon instead of drumming on the table or
piano. Now am I relieved from that tedious companion, my own self. I
never liked him very well; I had rather do any thing than have a sober
talk with a serious personage, who always takes me to do for not
making more of him. He scolds me, just as a stay-at-home wife lectures
a gay husband, who never returns to his better half when he finds any
thing to amuse him abroad. Good-by, old fellow; I have found better
company than your rememberings or hopings; to wit, Miss Flora Cooper,
alias Little Handsome, alias Aunt Tabby's Canary.

The first day or two after her arrival, Miss Flora pouted at me.  I
was exceedingly well amused, making all the saucy speeches I could
think of, in the pure spirit of mischief, and taking no notice of her
tossing her pretty head, and turning her back upon me. Finding that
her displeasure was not producing any particular effect upon the
object of it, I imagine the indignant beauty begins to plot a
different revenge on me. "Ha, ha! Miss Flora! It is not because you
like me better than you did, that you are all smiles, and grace, and
sunshine. I shall not flatter you the more, I am determined. I am on
my guard. You shall never boast of me on your list of obsequious
admirers. No, no, Little Handsome! I am no lady's man, and never was
flirted withal in my life. I defy your smiles, as stoutly as your
frowns. I like your pretty face; yes, it is exceedingly beautiful, as
far as form and coloring go to make up the beauty of a face. And the
play of the features,--yes, very lively and pretty, only too much of
it. You should not smile so often; and I am tired of your pretty
surprise, your playful upbraidings, and the raps of your fan. I want
more repose of feature, Little Handsome. Now, what a contrast you and
sedate Miss Etty present! Ah, very good! I am glad you have given up
following Little Ugly out of the room the moment we rise from
table. You sit down to your tiny basket, and demurely take out
something that passes for work. I don't see you do much at it,
however. I give you warning that I never hold skeins to be wound, not
I. I will not read aloud; so you need not offer me that 'Sonnet to
Flora,' in manuscript, nor your pet poet in print. We will talk; it is
a comfort to have my wit appreciated, after wasting so much on my
aunt, who cannot, and Miss Etty, who will not understand. I am glad to
have a chance to speak, and to hear a human voice in answer. I like
especially to rattle on when any nonsense will do. Chat is truly
agreeable when one's brains are not severely taxed to keep it going."

_Sept. 24th_. Charming little Canary! I have spent the forenoon with
her at the piano. I like her playing when she does not attempt my
favorite tunes. It must be confessed she is apt to vary somewhat, and
not for the better always. Her singing,--Aunt Tabitha well describes
it as that of a canary; sweet and liquid, and clear, and sustained,
but all alike. Her throat is a fine instrument; I shall teach her to
use it with more expression and feeling. We will have another lesson
to-morrow.

I thought, though, there was a shadow over her face when I called it
_practising_. Etty's eyes met mine at the moment, a rare occurrence.
What was her thought? One cannot read in her immovable face.

_Evening_. I am booked for a horseback ride with Little Handsome
to-morrow morning. How did she make me offer? I did not mean to. All
country girls ride, I believe. I often see Miss Etty cantering through
the shady lanes all by herself. I saw the bars down, at the end of the
track through the wood, one day. I immediately concluded that Little
Ugly had paced off that way, that I need not see her from my window. I
put the bars up again, and lay in wait behind the bushes. Soon I heard
her approaching. I come forward as she comes near, on that rat-like
pony of hers, who holds his head down as if searching for something
lost in the road. I stand in doubt whether to laugh at her
predicament, or advance in a gentlemanly manner to remove the obstacle
I had put in her way. When lo! the absurd little nag clears it at a
bound, and skims away over the green track like a swallow, till he
vanishes under the leafy arch. I am left in a very foolish attitude,
with mouth and eyes wide open.

Now this independent young lady shall be at liberty to take care of
herself, with no officious interference of mine; I will not invite her
to join us to-morrow morning, as I intended. I wonder if any horses
are to be procured that are not rats. I hope Miss Flora knows enough
to mount her pony, for I am sure I do not know how to help her. Whew!
I hope we shall meet with no disasters! I feel certain Little Handsome
would scream like a sea-gull, pull the wrong rein, tangle her foot in
the stirrup or riding-skirt, faint, fall, break her neck--O horrors!
Will not the dear old Aunt Tabitha forbid her going?

What a well-proportioned and ladylike figure it was, now I think of
it! How gracefully she sat upon her flying Dobbin!

_Sept. 25th_. Rainy. Glad of it. Breakfast late. Miss Etty did not
appear, having been up some hours, I imagine. What for, I wonder? What
can she be about? One thing pleases me in her. If Aunt Tabitha wants
any little attention, a needle threaded, or a dropped stitch taken up,
Miss Etty quietly comes to her aid. It is so entirely a matter of
course, the old lady only smiles, but any service from Flora calls
forth an acknowledgment; it being a particular effort of good nature,
and generally the fruit of a direct appeal. Miss Etty talks more than
she did, too. While I am talking nonsense with Little Handsome, I hear
her amusing my good aunty, and I catch a few words, her utterance
having a peculiar distinctness, and the lowest tones being fine and
clear, like those of a good singer on a pianissimo strain. It is a
peculiarly ladylike articulation; was she born and bred in Ratborough,
I wonder? She never speaks while we are singing. Does she like music,
then? I asked her once, but what sort of answer is "Yes!"  to such a
question? And that is all I elicited.

Music again, the forenoon occupation. Miss Flora does not like being
criticized, I find. One must not presume to set her right in the
smallest particular. Singers are proverbially irritable! I am not
certain _I_ could belong to a glee-club, and never get cross or
unreasonable. I hate to be corrected; but I hate more to be incorrect.
I could give Canary a hint or two now and then that would be
serviceable, if she would permit it. I have no right, however, to take
it upon me to instruct her, and it puts her in a pet. She laughed it
off, but I saw the mounting color and the flashing glance. I am an
impudent fellow, I suppose. Honest, to boot. I think she need not take
offence at what was intended as a friendly help. I am no flatterer, at
least. Really, I am hurt that I might not take so trifling a liberty
in behalf of my favorite song. I'll walk off as often as she sings
it. Can her temper be perfectly good? And yet, one could not expect--I
ought not to be surprised. Yet I can't help thinking, suppose--just
suppose I _had_ a right to find fault,--suppose I were a near
friend,--would she bear it then?  Supposing she were my companion for
life--Humph! that startles one,--was I near thinking of it in earnest?
She is beautiful; I should be proud of her abroad. But at home,--at
home, where there should be confidence, would there not be constraint?
Must no improvement ever be suggested, because it implies
imperfection? I hope none of my friends will ever be on such terms
with me; if I am touchy like a nettle, may they grasp me hard, and
fear me not.

_Sept. 26th_. This little sheet of water in front of the house has the
greatest variety of aspects; its face is like a human face, full of
varying expressions. A slight haze made it so beautiful just before
sunset, I took my chair, and put it out of the window upon the grass,
then followed it, and sat with it tipped back against the house, close
by the window of one of those mysterious rooms where Miss Etty immures
herself. I heard the Canary say in a scolding tone, "I should think
you might oblige me; it is such a trifle to do, it is not worth
refusing. Why should you care for him!"

No answer, though I confess my ears were erected to the sharpest
attitude of listening. I was wholly oblivious of _myself_, or I should
have taken myself away, as in honor bound.

"Won't you now, Etty? I'll only ask for one of our old duets, just
one."

"No, Flora," said Little Ugly, coldly enough.

"Why not?" No answer.

"To be sure, _he_ might hear. He would find out that you are
musical. What of that? Where is the use of being _able_ to sing, to
sing only when there's nobody to listen?"

"I sing only to friends. I cannot sing, I have never sung, to persons
in whom I have no confidence."

"Afraid! What a little goose!"

"Not afraid, exactly."

"I don't comprehend, I am sure."

"I do not expect you should."

"I never did understand you."

"You never will." Silence again.

Flora tuned up, and, of all tunes, she must needs hum _my_ song. I was
on my feet in a moment to depart, when I heard the clear tones of
Etty's voice again, and stood still, with one foot advanced.

"Flora, you should sharp that third note in the last line."

Flora murdered it again, with the most atrocious, cold-blooded
cruelty. I almost mocked the sound aloud in my passion.

"I do not tell you to vex you, only I saw that Mr. Ratcliffe--"

"You need not trouble yourself about _his_ opinion."

"I knew you would not like it, if I told you of a mistake. But I
supposed you would rectify it, and I should have done you a kindness,
even against your will."

"And I to hate you for it, eh?"

"If you can."

"Indeed I cannot, Etty, for you are my very best friend. But you are a
horrid, truth-telling, formidable body. Why not let me sing on, my own
way? I don't thank you a bit. I had rather sing it wrong, than be
corrected. It hurts my pride. I think people should take my music as
they find it. If it does not please them, they are not obliged to ask
me to sing. One note wrong can surely be put up with, if the rest is
worth hearing. I shall continue to sing it as I have done, I think."

"No,--please don't!"

"If I will mend it when I think of it, will you sing a duet?"

"Yes, though it will cost me more than you know."

"Poh!" And Flora sang the song, without accompaniment. The desired
sharp rung upon my ears, and set my nerves at rest.

"Bravo! Encore!" I cried, beneath the window, and was pelted with
peach-stones.

I wonder when this duet is to come off.

_Sept. 27th_. Have not stirred from the house. But I have not heard
any voice but Flora's. She has been uncommonly amiable and
fascinating, and I--am I not rather bewitched? I cannot keep my
resolution of not being flirted with. I cannot be wise, and reserved,
and indifferent. Am I trifling? Or am I in earnest? Indeed I don't
know. I only know I am constantly at the side of Little Handsome,
without knowing how I came there. She makes me sing with her, ride
with her, walk with her, at her will, and as if that was not enough
for one day, to test her power over me, to-night she made me dance
with her. And now I feel like a fool as I think of Etty playing a
waltz for us, at Flora's request, and giving me a long, serious look
as I approached the piano to compliment her playing. I could not utter
a word. I answered her gaze with one as sober, and more sad, and came
away to my room, to have some talk with my real self. Now for it.

Says I to Myself, "A truce to your upbraidings, you old scold; tell me
at once how you find yourself affected towards this charming little
Flora."

Says Myself, "There are no tastes in common between her and me."

Says I, quickly, "Music!" and triumphed a moment or two.

But the snarling old fellow asked whether I liked her singing, or her
flattery? For his part, he thought we both liked to hear our own
voices, and agreed in nothing else. Taste, indeed! when I would not
let her sing a song I cared a fillip for.

In short, my self-communion ended in some very sage resolutions. I
feared the beautiful head with the shining curls was somewhat
vacant. And the heart,--was that empty likewise? Or was that hidden
cell the home of all the loveliest affections, the firmest and purest
faith and motive, every thing that should be there to rule the
life--and--my picture on the wall? A question this.--Does she love me?
"O yes!" answered vanity. "O no!" said good sense, "not at all. If
your picture is in her heart, it is one of a whole gallery.  Don't be
a fop. It is not your character. Don't let Flora make a fool of you."

And I resolved--

_Sept. 27th_. A very dull day. "You are as sober as a judge," said
Flora at breakfast. I caught Etty's eye,--but it said nothing. Aunt
Tabitha, who yesterday evidently thought me in desperate case, and
once inquired about my income very significantly, now suspected a
quarrel between Flora and me. I was embarrassed, and overturned the
cream. "No great loss," said Etty, seeing that I was chagrined. "As
easy made up as a lovers' quarrel," said Aunt Tabitha. Silly old
woman! No, silly young fellow! Flora has revenged herself on me as she
meant to do, for defying her power. She has turned my head; made me
act like a simpleton. But "Richard's himself again," and wiser than he
was.

_P.M_. I endeavored to talk more with Miss Etty, that the change in my
manner might be less observed. It was all natural that I should be as
grave as a judge when I addressed myself to so quiet a member of
society. She seemed to divine my object, and sustained the dialogue; I
never knew her to do it before. It is not diffidence, it seems, that
has been the cause of this reserve; I was the more diffident of the
two, failing to express my thoughts well, from a hurry and uncertainty
of mind which I am not often troubled withal. It was partly
astonishment, in truth, that confused me. Little Ugly and I actually
exchanging ideas! I shall call her Little Ugly still, however, for I
could not make her look at me as she spoke, nor answer my wit by a
change of countenance.

_Sept. 28th_. Little Handsome cannot be convinced that the flirtation
is over,--absolutely at an end. She alternately rails at my capricious
solemnity, and pretends to be grieved at it. I can see that nothing
but my avoidance of a _tete-a-tete_ is my safety. Should the
sentimental tone prevail, and tears come into those beautiful eyes, I
am a gone man. At my earnest request, (I have grown humble or _bold_
enough to ask a favor,) Miss Etty has brought, or rather dragged, her
work-basket into the parlor.  A great basket it is, so great, that I
imagine in her own apartment she gets into the middle of it bodily. I
sat down to watch the motions of her adroit little digits in darning
stockings, and mending homely garments. I imagined, rather than saw, a
humorous gleam in her eye, as I did so, and there was certainly a
slight contraction of her mouth in length, as if to counteract an
inclination of the muscles to move in the opposite direction.

Flora fluttered about the room like a bright-hued butterfly, pausing a
moment at a window or a bookcase, or resting awhile to play a few
capricious notes on the piano, and sometimes coming to view Miss
Etty's employment, as if it were a branch of industry she was
unacquainted with, and curious about.

The maples are turning red already. The setting sun threw a glorious
light through their tinted foliage, and the still bosom of the lake
reflected it in a softened, changeable hue of mingled crimson and
silver. Flora was standing at the door. I somehow found myself there
also; but I talked over my shoulder to Aunt Tabitha about potatoes.

"I have a fancy for a walk round the pond," said Flora. After a pause,
she looked at me, as much as to say, "Don't you see, you monster, it
is too late for me to go alone?"

"Miss Flora, I will second your wish, if you can drum up a third
party," said I, point-blank.

Flora blushed, and pouted for a moment, then beckoned to Little Ugly,
who disobligingly suggested that the grass would be wet. It so
happened there was no dew, and Flora convinced her of the fact by
running in the grass, and then presenting the sole of her shoe for her
inspection. Miss Etty, her ill-chosen objection being vanquished, went
for her bonnet, and we set forth, Miss Flora's arm in mine as a matter
of course, and Miss Etty's in hers, save where the exigencies of the
woodland path gave her an excuse to drop behind. A little boat tied to
a stump, suggested to Flora a new whim. Instead of going round the
pond, which I now began to like doing, I must weary myself with rowing
her across. I was ready enough to do it, however, had not Miss Etty
quietly observed that the pond was muddy, and the boat unseaworthy.
Flora would not have yielded to twenty feet of water,--but mud! She
sighed, and resumed my arm. I, offering the other to Miss Etty in so
determined a way, that she could not waive accepting it, marched
forward with spirits rising into high glee and loquacity. Presently,
feeling a sudden irritation at the feather-like lightness with which
Little Ugly's fingers just touched my elbow, as if she disdained any
support from me, I caught her hand and drew it through my arm, and
when I relinquished it, pressed her arm to my side with mine, thinking
she would snatch it away, and walk alone in offended dignity. Whether
she was too really dignified for that, or took my rebuke as it was
intended, I know not, but she leaned on my arm with somewhat greater
confidence during the remainder of our walk, and now and then even
volunteered a remark. Before we finished the circumambulation of the
pond, she had quite forgotten her sulky reserve, and talked with much
earnestness and animation, Flora subsiding into a listener, with a
willing interest which raised her in my estimation considerably.

And now that I am alone in my room, and journalizing, it behooves me
to gather up and record some of those words, precious from their
rarity. Flora and I, in our merry nonsense, had a mock dispute, and
referred the matter to Miss Etty for arbitration.

"Etty, mind you side with me," said Flora.

"Be an impartial umpire, Miss Etty," said I, "and you will be on my
side."

Little Ugly was obliged to confess that she had not heard a word of
the matter, her thoughts being elsewhere, intently engaged.

"I must request you to excuse my inattention," she said, "and to
repeat what you were saying."

"The latter request I scorn to grant," said I, "and the former we will
consider about when we have heard what thoughts have been preferred to
our most edifying conversation."

"You shall tell us," said Flora. "Yes, or we till go off and leave you
to your meditations, here in the dark woods, with the owls and the
tree-toads, whom you probably prefer for company."

Miss Etty condescended to confess she should be frightened without my
manful protection.--Quite a triumph!

"I must thank you," she said, "for the novelty of an evening walk in
the woods. I enjoy it, I confess, very highly. Look at those dark,
mysterious vistas, and those deepening shadows blending the bank with
its mirror; how different from the trite daylight truth! It took
strong hold of my imagination."

"Go on. And so you were thinking--"

"I was hardly doing so much as thinking. I was seeing it to remember."

"Etty draws like an artist," said Flora, in a whisper.

"I was taking a mental daguerreotype of my companions, by twilight,
and of all the scene round, too, in the same grey tint, just to look
at some ten or fifteen years hence, when--"

"Let us all three agree," said I, "on the 28th of September, 18--, to
remember this evening. I am certain _I_ shall look back to it with
pleasure."

"O horrid!" shrieked Flora; "how can you talk so! By that time you
will be a shocking, middle-aged sort of person! I always wonder how
people can be resigned to live, when they have lost youth, and with it
all that makes life bearable! Fifteen years! Dismal thought! I shall
have outlived every thing I care about in life!" So moaned Little
Handsome.

"But you may have found new sources of interest," suggested I, perhaps
a little too tenderly, for I had some sympathy with her dread of that
particular phase of existence, middle-agedness. "Perhaps as the
mistress of a household--"

"Worse and worse!" screamed Flora. "A miserable comforter you are! As
if it were not enough merely to grow old, but one must be a slave and
a martyr, never doing any thing one would prefer to do, nor going
anywhere that one wants to go,--bound for ever to one spot, and one
perpetual companion--"

"Planning dinners every day for cooks hardly less ignorant than
yourself," added I, laughing at her selfish horror of matronly
bondage, yet provoked at it. "Miss Etty, would _you_, if you could,
stand still instead of going forward?"

"My happiness is altogether different from Flora's," she replied,
"though we were brought up side by side. What has taught me to be
independent of the world and its notice was my being continually
compared with her, and assured, with compassionate regret, that I had
none of those qualifications which could give me success in general
society."

"Which was a libel--" I began.

"Without the last syllable," said Flora, catching up the word.

"At any rate, I knew I was plain and shy, and made friends slowly. So
I chose such pleasures as should be under my own control, and could
never fail me. They make my life so much happier and more precious
than it was ten years ago, that I feel certain I shall have a wider
and fuller enjoyment of the same ten years hence."

What they are, I partly guess, and partly drew from her, in her
uncommonly frank mood. I begin to perceive that I, as well as Flora,
have been cherishing most mistaken and unsatisfactory aims. My surly
old inner self has often hinted as much, but I would not hear him.
Etty may have _her_ mistaken views too, but she has set me thinking.

Well, you crusty old curmudgeon, what has been my course since the awe
of the schoolmaster ceased to be a sort of external conscience?

"You told me study was none of my business," says Conscience, "and a
pretty piece of work you have made of it without me. Idle in college,
and, when you began to perceive the connection between study and what
people call success in life, overworking yourself, here you are, and
just beginning to bethink yourself that I might have furnished just
the right degree of stimulus, if you had but allowed it."--

Hark! hark! It is the duet! That silvery second is Etty's. I will
steal down stairs, and when they have ended, pop in, and it shall go
hard but I will have another song.

Parlor dark and empty. I fancied I heard Flora giggling somewhere, but
I might be mistaken. Yet the voices sounded as if they came from that
quarter--and--and I am sure I heard one note on the piano to give the
pitch. Hark! I hear the parlor door softly shut, and now the stairs
creak, and betray them stealing up, as they probably betrayed me
stealing down. They only blew out the lights and kept perfectly
still.--Witches!--Donkey!

Etty, your voice is still with me, clear, sweet, and penetrating, as
it was when you talked so eloquently to-night, in our dreamy ramble.--
What if I had early adopted her idea, that with every conscious power
is bound up both the duty and the pleasure of developing it? Might I
not now have reached higher ground, with health of body and mind?
Ambition is an unhealthy stimulus. A wretchedly uneasy guest too, in
the breast of an invalid. I would fain have a purer motive, which
shall dismiss or control it.

Etty,--what are the uses to be made of _her_ talents, while she lives
thus withdrawn into a world of her own? Certainly, she is wrong; I
shall convince her of it, when our friendship, now fairly planted, I
trust, shall have taken root. Now we shall be the best friends in the
world, and I will confide to her my--my--O, I am nodding over my
paper, and that click says the old clock at the stair-head is making
ready to announce midnight.

_Sept. 29th_. Capricious are the ways of womankind! Little Ugly is
more thoroughly self-occupied and undemonstrative than ever. I am
chagrined,--I think I am an ill-used man. I am downright angry and
have half a mind to flirt with Little Handsome, out of spite. Only
Miss Etty is too indifferent to care. I did but leave my old aunt to
Flora, and step back to remark that it was a pleasant Sunday, that the
sermon was homely and dull, and that the singing was discordant. Miss
Etty assented, but very coldly, and presently she bolted into an old
red house, and left me to go home by myself. When we started for
church again, she was among the missing, and we found her in the pew,
on our arrival. Thus pointedly to avoid me!--It might be accident,
however, for she did not refuse to sing from the same hymn-book with
me, and pointed to a verse on the other page, quaint, but
excellent. After all, old Watts has written the best hymns in the
language.

_Evening_. Without choice, I found myself walking round the pond
again. It was as smooth as glass, and the leaves scarcely trembled on
the trees and bushes round it. And in my heart reigned a similar calm.
A strange quiet has fallen on my usually restless and anxious mind. I
thought that in future I could be content not to look beyond the
present duty, and, having done my best in all circumstances, that I
could leave the results to follow as God wills. At that moment I could
sincerely say, "Let him set me high or low, wherever he has work for
me to perform." If I can remain thus quiet in mind, my health will
soon return, I feel assured.

"_If!_" A well-founded distrust, I fear. This peace must be only a
mood, to pass away when my natural spirits return. The fever of
covetousness, of rivalry, of envy, and ambitious earthly aspirations,
will come back. Like waves upon the lake, these uneasy feelings will
chase each other over my soul. I picked up a little linen wristband at
this moment, which I recognized. "She does not deserve to have it
again, sulky Little Ugly!" said I. "I will put it in my pocket-book,
and keep it as a remembrancer, for--I am glad to perceive--this is the
very spot where we stood when we agreed to remember it and each other
fifteen years hence. We will see what I shall be then, and I shall
have some aid from this funny little talisman; it will speak to me
quite as intelligibly and distinctly as its owner in a _silent_ mood,
at any rate."--

Heigh-ho! How lonely I feel to-night! Every human soul is--must be--a
hermit, yet there might be something nearer companionship than I have
found for mine as yet. No one knows me. My real self--Ha! old fellow,
I like you better than I did; let us be good friends.

_Sept. 30th_. A golden sunrise. How much one loses under a false idea
of its being a luxury to sleep in the morning! Reclining under Farmer
Puddingstone's elm, and looking upon the glassy pond, in which the
glowing sky mirrored itself, my soul was fired with poetic
inspiration. On the blank page of a letter, I wrote:

  "How holy the calm, in the stillness of morn,"--

and threw down my paper, being suddenly quenched by self-ridicule, as
I was debating whether to write "To Ethelind" over the top.  Returning
that way after my ramble, I found the following conclusion pinned to
the tree by a jackknife:--

  "How holy the calm, in the stillness of morn,--
  When to call 'em to breakfast Josh toots on the horn,
  The ducks gives a quack, and the caow gives a moo,
  And the childen chimes in with their plaintive boo-hoo.

  "How holy the calm, in the stillness of neune,
  When the pot is a singin its silvery teune,--
  Its soft, woolly teune, jest like Aribi's Darter,
  While the tea-kettle plays up the simperny arter.

  "How holy the calm, in the stillness of night,
  When the moon, like a punkin, looks yaller and bright;
  While the aowls an' the katydids, screeching like time,
  Jest brings me up close to the eend o' my rhyme."

And underneath was added, as if in scorn of my fruitless endeavor:--

"I wrote that are right off, as fast as you could shell corn. S.P."

I suppose it is by way of thanks for my having driven the pigs from
the garden, that I find a great bunch of dahlias adorning my
mantelpiece. A brown earthen pitcher! And in the middle of the
dahlias, a magnificent sunflower! It must be my aunt's doing, and its
very homeliness pleases me, just as I love her homely sincerity of
affection. Who arranges the glasses in the parlor? Etty, I would not
fear to affirm, from the asters and golden-rod, cheek by jole with
petunias and carnations. I wonder if she would not like some of the
clematis I saw twining about a dead tree by the pond. It is more
beautiful in its present state than when it was in flower. Etty loves
wild flowers because she is one herself, and loves to hide here in her
native nook, where no eye (I might except my own) gives her more than
a casual glance.--

_Noon_. "I shall think it quite uncivil of Little Ugly if she does not
volunteer to arrange my share of the booty I am bringing, now that I
have almost broken my neck, and quite my cane, to obtain it." This I
said to myself, as I came into the house by the kitchen entrance, and
proceeded to deposit my trailing treasures on Norah's table, by the
side of a yellow squash.

"Do go with me to Captain Black's," said Etty's voice at the side
door. "The old folks have not seen you since your return."

"I can't!" said Flora with a drawl.

"Yes, do! Be coaxable, for once!"

"It only makes me obstinate to coax. Why not go without me, I beg?"

"I am no novelty. I was in twice only yesterday. Old people like
attention from such as you, because--"

"Because it is unreasonable to expect it."

"The old man is failing."

"I can't do him any good. It is dusty, and my gown is long."

"It would please him to see you. I went to sit with him yesterday, but
Timothy Digfort came in, with the same intent. So I went to church,
having walked in the graveyard till the bell rang."

"Owl that you are! I don't envy you the lively meditations you must
have had. Why don't you go? It's of no use waiting for me."

"What! Will you let me carry both these baskets?"

"There, put the little one on the top of the other. I don't think
three or four peaches and a few flowers can add much to the weight. It
is tiresome enough to do what I don't want to do, when it is really
necessary."

And Little Handsome danced into the parlor, without perceiving me. I
laid a detaining hand on Etty's basket as she put herself in motion,
on which she turned round with a look of unfeigned astonishment.

"May I not be a substitute for Flora?" I inquired.

"I do not require any aid," said Miss Etty shyly. "It is not on that
account I was urging Flora. Please to let me have the basket.--Indeed,
it is quite unnecessary you should trouble yourself," she insisted, as
I persevered in carrying off my load.

"It is the old red house, is it not?" said I, "with the roof sloping
almost to the ground. And shall I say that _you_ sent this? A view of
my strange phiz will not refresh the old people like the sight of
Flora's fresh young face, but I shall go in, and make the agreeable as
well as I can."

"Are you really in earnest?" asked Etty, looking full in my face, with
a smile of wonder that made her radiantly beautiful. She turned away
blushing at my surprised and eager gaze, and, taking up her little
basket, joined me, without a word of answer on my part. It was some
time before I quite recovered from a strange flurry of spirits, which
made my heart bump very much as it does when I hear any unexpected
good news. And then I dashed away upon the subject of old age, and any
thing else that came uppermost, in the hope of drawing the
soul-lighted eyes to mine again, with that transfiguring smile playing
upon the lips.

But I was like an unskilful magician; I had lost the spell; I could
not again discover the spring I had touched. In vain I said to myself,
"I'll make her do it again!" Little Ugly would'nt!

She answered my incoherent sallies in her usual sedate manner, and I
believe it was only in my imagination that her cheek dimpled a little,
with a heightened color, now and then, when I was particularly
eloquent.

Introduced by Miss Etty, I was cordially welcomed. I am always
affected by the sight of an aged woman who at all reminds me of the
grandmother so indulgent to my prankful boyhood. The old man, too,
interested me; he has seen much of the world, in his seafaring life,
and related his adventures in a most unhackneyed style. I'll go and
see them every day. One of the Captain's anecdotes was very good. "An
old salt," he said, "once--once--" Bah, what was it? How very lovely
Etty looked, sitting on a cricket at the old woman's feet, and, with a
half smile on her face, submitting her polished little head to be
stroked by her trembling hands! This I saw out of the corner of my
eye.

Hark! Aunt Tabitha's call to dinner. I am glad of it. I was scribbling
_such_ nonsense, when I have so much to write better worth while.

_12 o'clock_. The night is beautiful, and it is a piece of self-denial
to close the shutter, light my lamp, and write in my journal. Peace of
mind came yesterday, positive happiness to-day, neither of which I can
analyze. I only know I have not been so thoroughly content since the
acquisition of my first jackknife; nor so proud since the day when I
first sported a shining beaver. I have conquered Etty's distrust; she
has actually promised me her friendship. I am rather surprised that I
am so enchanted at this triumph over a prejudice. I am hugely
delighted. Not because it is a triumph, however;--vanity has nothing
to do with it. It is a worthier feeling, one in which humility mingles
with a more cordial self-respect than I have hitherto been conscious
of. I can, and I will, deserve Etty's good opinion. She is an
uncompromising judge, but I will surprise her by going beyond what she
believes me capable of. I never had a sister; I shall adopt Etty, and
when I go home, we will write every week, if not every day.

But how came it all about? By what blessed sunbeams can the ice have
been softened, till now, as I hope, it is broken up for ever?  People
under the same roof cannot long mistake each other, it seems, else
Etty and I should never have become friends.

As we left the door of Captain Black's house, and turned into the
field path to avoid the dust, Etty said, "I do not know whether you
care much about it, but you have given pleasure to these good old
people, who have but little variety in their daily routine, being
poor, and infirm, and lonely. It is really a duty to cheer them up, if
we can." I felt that it warmed my heart to have shared that duty with
her, and I said so. I thought she looked doubtful and surprised. It
was a good opening for egotism, and I improved it. I saw that she was
no uninterested listener, but all along rather suspicious and
incredulous, as if what I was claiming for myself was inconsistent
with her previous notions of my disposition. I believe I had made some
little impression Saturday night, but her old distrust had come back
by Sunday morning.  Now she was again shaken.

At last, looking up with the air of one who has taken a mighty
resolve, she said, "I presume such a keen observer as yourself must
have noticed that the most reserved people are, on some occasions, the
most frank and direct. I am going to tell you that I feel some apology
due to you, if my first impressions of your character are really
incorrect. I am puzzled what to think."

"I am to suppose that your first impressions were not as favorable as
those of Mrs. Black, whom I heard remark that I was an amiable youth,
with an uncommonly pleasant smile."

"Just the opposite, in fact,--pardon me! To my eye, you had a mocking,
ironical cast of countenance. I felt sure at once you were the sort of
person I never could make a _friend_ of, and acquaintances I leave to
Flora, who wants to know every body. I thought the less I had to do
with you the better."

I felt hurt, and almost insulted. I had not been mistaken, then; she
had disliked me, and perhaps disliked me yet.

"It was not that I stood in fear of your satire," she continued; "I am
indifferent to ridicule or censure in general; no one but a _friend_
has power to wound me."

A flattering emphasis, truly! I felt my temper a little stirred by
Miss Etty's frankness. I was sulkily silent.

"_I_ had no claim to any forbearance, any consideration for
peculiarities of any sort. I am perfectly resigned to being the theme
of your wit in any circle, if you can find aught in _my_ country-bred
ways to amuse you."

Zounds! I must speak.

"My conduct to Flora must have confirmed the charming impression
produced by my unlucky phiz, I imagine. But don't bear malice against
me in _her_ behalf; you must have seen that she was perfectly able to
revenge herself."

Etty's light-hearted laugh rung out, and reminded me of my once
baffled curiosity when it reached my ear from Norah's domain. But
though this unsuppressed mirth of hers revealed the prettiest row of
teeth in the world, and made the whole face decidedly beautiful,
somehow or other it gave me no pleasure, but rather a feeling of
depression. My joining in it was pure pretence.

Presently the brightness faded, and I found myself gazing at the cold
countenance of Little Ugly again.

"No, I did not refer to Flora," said she. "As you say, she can avenge
her own quarrel, and we both were quite as ready to laugh at you, as
you could be to laugh at us, I assure you."

"No doubt of it," said I, with some pique.

"But what I cannot forgive you, cannot think of with any toleration,
is--"

"What?" cried I, astonished. "How have I offended?"

"A man of any right feeling at all could not make game of an aged
woman, his own relative, at the same time that he was receiving her
hearty and affectionate hospitality."

"Neither have I done so," cried I, in a towering passion. "You do me a
great wrong in accusing me of it. I would knock any man down who
should treat my aunt with any disrespect. And if I have sometimes
allowed Flora to do it unrebuked, you well know that she might once
have pulled my hair, or cuffed my ears, and I should have thought it a
becoming thing for a young lady to do. I have played the fool under
your eye, and submit that you should entertain no high opinion of my
wisdom. But you have no right to judge so unfavorably of my heart. If
I have spoken to my aunt with boyish petulance when she vexed me, at
least it was to her face, and regretted and atoned for to her
satisfaction. I am incapable of deceiving her, much less of ridiculing
her either behind her back or before her face. I respond to her love
for me with sincere gratitude, and the sister of my grandmother shall
never want any attention that an own grandson could render while I
live. I shall find it hard to forgive you this accusation, Miss Etty,"
I said, haughtily, and shut my mouth as if I would never speak to her
again.

She made no answer, but looked up into my face with one of those
wondrous smiles. It went as straight to my heart as a pistol bullet
could do, my high indignation proving no defence against it. I was
instantly vanquished, and as I heartily shook the hand she held out to
me, I was just able to refrain from pressing it to my lips, which, now
I think of it, would have been a most absurd thing for me to do. I
wonder what could have made me think of doing it!

_After Dinner_. I hear Flora's musical laugh in the mysterious
boudoir, and a low, congratulatory little murmur of good humor on
Etty's part. I believe she is afraid to laugh loud, lest I should hear
her do it, and rush to the spot. The door is ajar; I'll storm the
castle.

Flora admitted me with a shout of welcome, the instant I tapped.  Etty
pushed a rocking-chair toward me, but said nothing. The little room
was almost lined with books. Drawings, paintings, shells, corals, and,
in the sunny window, plants, met my exploring gaze, but the great
basket was nowhere to be seen. It was got up for the nonce, I imagine.
Etty a rogue!

"This is the pleasantest nook in the house. It is a shame you have not
been let in before," said Flora, zealously. "You shall see Etty's
drawings." Neither of us opened the portfolio she seized, however, but
watched Etty's eyes. They were cast down with a diffident blush which
gave me pain; I was indeed an intruder. She gave us the permission we
waited for, however. There were many good copies of lessons: those I
did not dwell upon. But the sketches, spirited though imperfect, I
studied as if they had been those of an Allston. Etty was evidently in
a fidget at this preference of the smallest line of original talent
over the corrected performances which are like those of every body
else. I drew out a full-length figure done in black chalk on brown
paper. It chained Flora's wondering attention as quite new. It was a
young man with his chair tipped back; his feet rested on a table, with
a slipper perched on each toe. His hands were clasped upon the back of
his head. The face--really, I was angry at the diabolical expression
given it by eyes looking askance, and lips pressed into an arch by a
contemptuous smile. It was a corner of this very brown sheet that I
saw under her arm, when she vanished from the kitchen as I entered;
the vociferous mirth which attracted me was at my expense. Before
Flora could recognize my portrait, Little Ugly pounced upon it; it
fell in a crumpled lump into the bright little wood fire, and ceased
to exist.

"I had totally forgotten it," said she, with a blush which avenged my
wounded self-love. Ironical pleasure at having been the subject of her
pencil I could not indulge myself in expressing, as I did not care to
enlighten Little Handsome. Any lurking pique was banished when Etty
showed me, with a smile, the twilight view by the pond.

"Do you draw?" she asked; and Flora cried, "He makes caricatures of
his friends with pen and ink; let him deny it if he can!"

I was silent.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AUTUMN LEAVES***


******* This file should be named 17189.txt or 17189.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/1/8/17189



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Lock and Key Library/Real Life
#2 in our Lock and Key Library series by Julian Hawthorne
PART I--DETECTIVE STORIES FROM REAL LIFE
PART II--TRUE STORIES OF MODERN MAGIC

Also see:
The Lock and Key Library, Julian Hawthorne, Ed. #1[lckyl*.*] 1831

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Lock and Key Library/Real Life
#2 in our Lock and Key Library series by Julian Hawthorne
PART I--DETECTIVE STORIES FROM REAL LIFE
PART II--TRUE STORIES OF MODERN MAGIC


PART I--DETECTIVE STORIES FROM REAL LIFE

ARTHUR TRAIN

A Flight into Texas


P. H. WOODWARD

Adventures in the Secret Service of the Post-Office Department
An Erring Shepherd
An Aspirant for Congress
The Fortune of Seth Savage
A Wish Unexpectedly Gratified
An Old Game Revived
A Formidable Weapon


ANDREW LANG

Saint-Germain the Deathless
The Man in the Iron Mask
    The Legend
    The Valet's History
    The Valet's Master
    Original Papers in the Case of Roux De Marsilly



PART II--TRUE STORIES OF MODERN MAGIC


M. ROBERT-HOUDIN

A Conjurer's Confessions
Self-Training
"Second Sight"
The Magician Who Became an Ambassador
Facing the Arab's Pistol


DAVID P. ABBOTT

Fraudulent Spiritualism Unveiled
A Doctor of the Occult
How the Tricks Succeeded
The Name of the Dead
Mind Reading in Public
Some Famous Exposures


HEREWARD CARRINGTON

More Tricks of "Spiritualism"
"Matter through Matter"
Deception Explained by the Science of Psychology


ANONYMOUS

How Spirits Materialize



January, 2000  [Etext #2031]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Lock and Key Library/Real Life
******This file should be named 2lcky10.txt or 2lcky10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 2lcky11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 2lcky10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1997 for a total of 1000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 100 billion Etexts given away.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*



THE LOCK AND KEY LIBRARY

THE MOST INTERESTING STORIES OF ALL NATIONS

Edited by Julian Hawthorne


REAL LIFE


Table of contents

PART I--DETECTIVE STORIES FROM REAL LIFE


ARTHUR TRAIN

A Flight into Texas


P. H. WOODWARD

Adventures in the Secret Service of the Post-Office Department

An Erring Shepherd

An Aspirant for Congress

The Fortune of Seth Savage

A Wish Unexpectedly Gratified

An Old Game Revived

A Formidable Weapon



ANDREW LANG

Saint-Germain the Deathless

The Man in the Iron Mask

    The Legend

    The Valet's History

    The Valet's Master

    Original Papers in the Case of Roux De Marsilly



PART II--TRUE STORIES OF MODERN MAGIC


M. ROBERT-HOUDIN

A Conjurer's Confessions

Self-Training

"Second Sight"

The Magician Who Became an Ambassador

Facing the Arab's Pistol


DAVID P. ABBOTT

Fraudulent Spiritualism Unveiled

A Doctor of the Occult

How the Tricks Succeeded

The Name of the Dead

Mind Reading in Public

Some Famous Exposures


HEREWARD CARRINGTON

More Tricks of "Spiritualism"


"Matter through Matter"

Deception Explained by the Science of Psychology


ANONYMOUS

How Spirits Materialize



PART I--DETECTIVE STORIES FROM REAL LIFE



Arthur Train

A Flight into Texas


The flight and extradition of Charles F. Dodge unquestionably
involved one of the most extraordinary battles with justice in the
history of the criminal law.  The funds at the disposal of those
who were interested in procuring the prisoner's escape were
unlimited in extent, and the arch conspirator for whose safety
Dodge was spirited away was so influential in political and
criminal circles that he was all but successful in defying the
prosecutor of New York County, even supported as the latter was by
the military and judicial arm of the United States Government.
For, at the time that Dodge made his escape, a whisper from Hummel
was enough to make the dry bones of many a powerful and ostensibly
respectable official rattle and the tongue cleave to the roof of
his mouth in terror.


(The District Attorney's office in New York City is undoubtedly one
of the best watch-towers known from which to observe "Real Life
Detective Stories."

Arthur Train, sometime member of this prosecuting staff, has
opportunity to record several of these curious and exciting "True
Stories of Crime" (copyright, 1908, by Charles Scribners Sons).
None yields less to fiction save in the fact that it is true, and
not at all in quality of dramatic interest, than "A Flight into
Texas," here given.

Readers of the newspapers a few years ago will remember the names
of Abraham Hummel and Charles F. Dodge.  The latter, a railroad
conductor, was alleged to have committed perjury at the dictate of
the former, known as one of the brightest, least scrupulous lawyers
in this city.  It was one of District Attorney Jerome's great
ambitions to bring Hummel to justice.  Here was an opportunity.  If
Dodge could only be forced to testify to this perjury before a
court, Hummel could undoubtedly be convicted of a crime that would
not only disbar him from the legal profession, but would put him in
jail.

Dodge had run away and disappeared as the storm seemed about to
burst.  Where was he?  Who could find and bring him back--against
Abe Hummel's wish?--EDITOR.)


Who could accomplish that in which the law was powerless?--Hummel.
Who could drive to the uttermost ends of the earth persons against
whom not a shadow of suspicion had previously rested?--Hummel.  Who
dictated to the chiefs of police of foreign cities what they should
or should not do in certain cases; and who could, at the beckoning
of his little finger, summon to his dungeon-like offices in the New
York Life Building, whither his firm had removed from Centre
Street, the most prominent of lawyers, the most eminent of
citizens?--Surely none but Hummel.  And now Hummel was fighting for
his own life.  The only man that stood between him and the iron
bars of Blackwell's Island was Charles F. Dodge--the man whom he
had patted on the knee in his office and called a "Mascot," when
quite in the nature of business he needed a little perjury to
assist a wealthy client.

Hummel in terror called into play every resource upon which, during
forty years of practice, his tiny tentacles had fastened.  Who
shall say that while he made a show of enjoying himself nightly
with his accustomed lightheartedness in the Tenderloin, he did not
feel confident that in the end this peril would disappear like the
others which had from time to time threatened him during his
criminal career?  But Hummel was fully aware of the tenacity of the
man who had resolved to rid New York of his malign influence.  His
Nemesis was following him.  In his dreams, if he ever dreamed, it
probably took the shape of the square-shouldered District Attorney
in the shadow of whose office building the little shyster practiced
his profession.  Had he been told that this Nemesis was in reality
a jovial little man with a round, ruddy face and twinkling blue
eyes he would have laughed as heartily as it was in his power to
laugh.  Yet such was the fact.  A little man who looked less like a
detective than a commercial traveler selling St. Peter's Oil or
some other cheerful concoction, with manners as gentle and a voice
as soft as a spring zephyr, who always took off his hat when he
came into a business office, seemingly bashful to the point of
self-effacement, was the one who snatched Charles F. Dodge from the
borders of Mexico and held him in an iron grip when every influence
upon which Hummel could call for aid, from crooked police
officials, corrupt judges, and a gang of cutthroats under the guise
of a sheriff's posse, were fighting for his release.

Jesse Blocher is not employed in New York County, and for business
reasons he does not wish his present address known.  When he comes
to New York he occasionally drops into the writer's office for a
cigar and a friendly chat about old times.  And as he sits there
and talks so modestly and with such quiet humor about his
adventures with the Texas Rangers among the cactus-studded plains
of the Lone Star State, it is hard, even for one who knows the
truth, to realize that this man is one of the greatest of
detectives, or rather one of the most capable, resourceful, adroit,
and quick-witted knights of adventure who ever set forth upon a
seemingly impossible errand.

It is unnecessary to state just how the District Attorney
discovered the existence of "Jesse," as we knew him.  It is enough
to say that on Saturday morning, July 23, 1904, he was furnished
with the proper credentials and given instructions to proceed at
once to New Orleans, Louisiana, and "locate," if it were humanly
possible to do so, Charles F. Dodge, under indictment for perjury,
and potentially the chief witness against Abraham H. Hummel, on a
charge of conspiracy.  He was told briefly and to the point that,
in spite of the official reports from the police headquarters of
both New York City and New Orleans to the contrary, there was
reason to believe that Dodge was living, although not registered,
as a guest at the St. Charles Hotel in the latter city.  A partial
and inaccurate description of Dodge was given him and he was warned
to use extreme caution to prevent any knowledge of his mission from
being made known.  Once Dodge had been discovered, he was to keep
him under surveillance and wire New York immediately.

Accordingly, Jesse left the city upon the same day at 4.45 P. M.
and arrived two days later, at 9.15 on Monday morning, at New
Orleans, where he went directly to the St. Charles Hotel,
registered, and was assigned to room Number 547 on the fifth floor.
Somewhere in the hotel Dodge was secreted.  The question was how to
find him.  For an hour Jesse sat in the hotel foyer and
meditatively watched the visitors come and go, but saw no sign of
his quarry.  Then he arose, put on his hat, and hunted out a
stationery store where for two cents he bought a bright-red
envelope.  He then visited a ticket-scalper's office, secured the
owner's business card, and wrote a note on its back to Dodge,
offering him cheap transportation to any point that he might
desire.  Armed with this he returned to the hotel, walked to the
desk, glanced casually over a number of telegrams exposed in a rack
and, when the clerk turned his back, placed the note, addressed to
Charles F. Dodge, unobserved, upon the counter.  The office was a
busy one, guests were constantly depositing their keys and
receiving their mail, and, even as Jesse stood there watching
developments, the clerk turned round, found the note, and promptly
placed it in box Number 420.  The very simple scheme had worked,
and quite unconsciously the clerk had indicated the number of the
room occupied by Dodge.

Jesse lost no time in ascending to the fourth floor, viewed room
Number 420, returned to the desk, told the clerk that he was
dissatisfied with the room assigned him, and requested that he be
given either room Number 421, 423, or 425, one of which he stated
that he had occupied on a previous visit.  After some discussion
the clerk allotted him room Number 423, which was almost directly
opposite that occupied by Dodge, and the detective at once took up
his task of watching for the fugitive to appear.

Within the hour the door opened and Dodge and a companion, who
subsequently proved to be E. M. Bracken, alias "Bradley," an agent
employed by Howe and Hummel, left the room, went to the elevator,
and descended to the dining-room upon the second floor.  Jesse
watched until they were safely ensconced at breakfast and then
returned to the fourth floor where he tipped the chambermaid, told
her that he had left his key at the office, and induced her to
unlock the door of room Number 420, which she did under the
supposition that Jesse was the person who had left the chamber in
Dodge's company.  The contents of the room convinced Jesse that he
had found Dodge, for he discovered there two grips bearing Dodge's
name as well as several letters on the table addressed to him.  The
detective returned to the hall and had a little talk with the maid.

"The old gentleman with you has been quite sick," she said.  "How
is he to-day?"

"He is some better," answered Jesse.

"Yes, he does look better to-day," she added, "but he sho'ly was
powerful sick yesterday.  Why, he hasn't been out of his room befo'
fo' five or six days."

This statement was corroborated by Dodge's physical appearance, for
he looked haggard and worn.

Jesse was now confident that he had found Dodge, in spite of the
reports of the New Orleans police to the contrary, and he was also
reasonably sure that the fugitive was too sick to leave the hotel
immediately.  He therefore telegraphed his superiors that he had
discovered Dodge and that the latter was ill at the St. Charles
Hotel.

At three o'clock in the afternoon Jesse received a wire from New
York as follows:


"New Orleans police department claims party not there.  Left for
Mexico three weeks ago.  Ascertain correct destination and wire at
once."


Jesse at once replied:


"No question as to identity and presence here at this time."


He now took up the task of keeping his quarry under absolute
surveillance day and night, which duty from that moment he
continued for a period of nearly ten months.

During the remainder of the afternoon and throughout the night
Dodge and Bracken remained in room Number 420, and during the
evening were visited by several strangers, including a plain-
clothes officer from the New Orleans Police Headquarters.  Little
Hummel, dining in Long Acre Square in the glare of Broadway, was
pressing some invisible button that transmitted the power of his
influence even to the police government of a city two thousand
miles away.

The following day, January 26th, at about 8.40 in the morning,
Dodge and Bracken descended to the lobby.  Bracken departed from
the hotel, leaving Dodge to pay the bill at the cashier's window
and Jesse heard him order a cab for the 11.30 A. M. Sunset Limited
on the Southern Pacific Railroad and direct that his baggage be
removed from his room.  Jesse did the same.

In the meantime Bracken returned and promptly at 11 A. M. left for
the railroad station in a cab with Dodge.  Jesse followed in
another.  As the two passed through the gates the detective caught
a glimpse of Dodge's ticket and saw that it had been issued by the
Mexican National Railway.  Retiring to the telegraph office in the
station he wired New York as follows:


"Bird flying.--Sunset Limited.  Destination not known.  I am with
him."


He then hastily purchased a ticket to Houston, Texas, and boarded
the train.  Dodge's companion had bidden him good-by as the engine
started, and Jesse's task now became that of ferreting out Dodge's
destination.  After some difficulty he managed to get a glimpse of
the whole of the fugitive's ticket and thus discovered that he was
on his way to the City of Mexico, via Eagle Pass, Texas, while from
the Pullman conductor he learned that Dodge had secured sleeping-
car accommodation as far as San Antonio, Texas, only.

So far all was well.  He knew Dodge but Dodge did not know him, and
later on in the afternoon he had the satisfaction of a long talk
with his quarry in the observation car where they amiably discussed
together current events and argued politics with the same vehemence
as if they had been commercial travellers thrown fortuitously into
each other's company.  Dodge, however, cleverly evaded any
reference to his destination.


When the train reached Morgan City, Louisiana, at 3 P. M., which
was the first stop, Jesse wired New York as follows:


"On Sunset Limited with friend.  He has transportation to the City
of Mexico, via Eagle Pass, where I am now journeying with him.
Answer to Beaumont, Texas."


Later in the afternoon he sent an additional message from
Lafayette, Louisiana:


"Have seen transportation of friend and am positive of
destination."


Dodge was occupying Section 3 of the sleeping car "Capitola," and,
as became an invalid, retired early.

At Beaumont Jesse failed to receive any reply to his various
messages, and when the train arrived at Houston no word came from
New York until it was almost the time of departure.  Waiting until
practically the last moment Jesse hurried through the gates of the
Union Station at Houston and bought a ticket to San Antonio.  As he
was leaving the ticket window Night Chief of Police John Howard and
two officers came hurrying up inquiring anxiously for "Mr. Jesse."
The reenforcements had arrived.

Outside on the track "The Sunset Limited" was just getting under
way.  The first frantic puffs were being vomited from the funnel.
Inside Dodge was sleeping peacefully in his berth.  Jesse,
accompanied by Chief Howard, hurried up to the conductor who was
about to swing on to the steps of the sleeper, and ordered him to
hold the train till the fugitive could be removed.  After some
argument the conductor grumblingly complied and Dodge was aroused
from pleasant dreams of the "Creole Quarter" to the cold reality of
being dragged out of bed by a policeman.  He was unceremoniously
hustled out of the sleeping car into a carriage and taken to
Headquarters where he admitted his identity and remarked:

"I know what I am wanted for, but I will never return to New York."

In his grip was found the sum of $1,563.15, as well as numerous
letters from the law firm of Howe and Hummel, and a quantity of
newspaper clippings relative to his case.

Dodge pleaded with Chief Howard not to lock him up, urging that he
was a sick man and offering a goodly sum if he might be taken to a
hotel and guarded for the remainder of the night.  But what "went"
in New Orleans did not "go" in Houston, and the best that Dodge
could get for himself was a cot in the "Ladies' Detention Room" on
the second floor of the jail.

Early the following morning Jesse visited Police Headquarters and
for the first time met George Ellis, Chief of Police of Houston,
for whom he will always have a feeling of deep gratitude for his
enthusiastic cooperation and loyalty in the many stirring events
that followed.  Dodge now received a telegram from New York, which
was submitted to Jesse before reaching the prisoner, to the effect
that Howe and Hummel were sending on an attorney to aid the
fugitive in resisting extradition, and informing him that they had
employed Messrs. Hunt and Meyers as attorneys to look out for his
welfare.  These last immediately jumped in medias res and on the
afternoon of the same day secured a writ of habeas corpus from
Norman J. Kitrell, District Judge of Harris County, Texas,
returnable the following morning.

The next day, January 28th, Kitrell released Dodge from custody.

Jesse had anticipated this and immediately swore out another
warrant with the result that the prisoner was rearrested before he
left the courtroom.

Meantime the Dodge interests retained another firm of lawyers,
Messrs. Andrews and Ball, who, on the following day, secured a
second writ of habeas corpus from Judge Ashe.

The result of the first engagement thus being a draw, counsel on
both sides agreed that this writ should not be returnable for six
days.  During this period District Attorney Jerome employed Messrs.
Baker, Botts, Parker and Garwood to represent him and secured from
Governor Odell at Albany a requisition on Governor Lanham of Texas
for the extradition of the prisoner, which he entrusted to
Detective Sergeant Herlihy of the New York Police.  Herlihy reached
Houston with the papers on the evening of January 30th, and on the
same train with him came Abraham Kaffenburgh, a member of the law
firm of Howe and Hummel and a nephew of the latter.  Likewise also
came Bracken, still styling himself "E. M. Bradley," and from now
on Bracken was the inseparable companion, guide, philosopher, and
friend (?) of the unfortunate Dodge, whose continued existence upon
this earth had become such a menace to the little lawyer in New
York.

Herlihy, accompanied by Judge Garwood, proceeded direct to Austin
where they found Dodge already represented by Messrs. Andrews and
Ball who, at the hearing before Governor Lanham, made a strong
effort to induce that executive to refuse to honor the requisition
of the Governor of New York.  This effort failed and Governor
Lanham issued his warrant, but Herlihy had no sooner returned to
Houston for the purpose of taking possession of the prisoner than
he was served with an injunction enjoining him, together with Chief
of Police Ellis, from taking Dodge into custody, pending a hearing
upon a new habeas corpus which had been issued by Judge Waller T.
Burns of the United States District Court for the Southern District
of Texas.  This new writ was returnable February 9th.

After exhaustive but futile argument by the counsel for Dodge,
Judge Burns remanded the prisoner to Herlihy's custody to be
returned to the State of New York, but this decision had no sooner
been rendered than an appeal was taken therefrom by Dodge's
lawyers, and the prisoner released upon bail fixed at twenty
thousand dollars.

During this period Dodge was quartered under guard at the Rice
Hotel in Houston, and the day following the argument the twenty-
thousand-dollars bail was put up in cash and Dodge released from
custody.

In the meantime, however, Jesse, knowing that no sum, however
large, would deter Hummel from spiriting Dodge out of the country,
had made his arrangements to secure a new extradition warrant from
the Governor of Texas, so that if the prisoner did succeed in
getting beyond the Southern District of the Federal Court of Texas,
he could be seized and conveyed to New York.

Of course someone had to keep watch over Dodge while Jesse hurried
to Austin to see the Governor, and it was decided to leave Sergeant
Herlihy, re-enforced by a number of local detectives for that
purpose.  But while the watchful Jesse was away, Bracken proceeded
to get busy in the good old Howe and Hummel fashion.  Lots of
people that Herlihy had never seen before turned up and protested
that he was the finest fellow they had ever met.  And as Herlihy
was, in fact, a good fellow, he made them welcome and dined and
wined at their expense until he woke up in the Menger Hotel in San
Antonio and inquired where he was.

Jesse meantime had returned from Austin to discover that Dodge with
his companions, Kaffenburgh and Bracken, had slipped out of Houston
early in the morning of February 11th, after disposing of Herlihy
and eluding the watchfulness of Herlihy's assistants.  Hummel was
leading and by ten o'clock the next morning Dodge and his comrades
were on board an English merchantman lying in the harbor of
Galveston.  Later in the same day the Hummel interests chartered
from the Southern Pacific Railroad for the sum of three thousand
dollars the sea-going tug Hughes, to which Dodge was now
transferred for the purpose of being conveyed to the port of
Tampico in the Republic of Mexico.

But here Hummel's wires became crossed with Jerome's, and
unfortunately for the little lawyer, the persons from whom the tug
had been leased turned out to be closely allied with the
prosecution's interests, with the result that the captain of the
tug was instructed by his superiors under no consideration to put
into any Mexican port, but on the contrary, to delay his departure
from the harbor of Galveston for a period of two days and then to
proceed only as far as Brownsville, Texas, where he should compel
the debarkation of the fugitive.  The captain, who was a good sport
as well as a good officer, promptly threw himself into the part and
told Bracken and Kaffenburgh that it was evident from the barometer
that a severe storm was approaching (which must have had a sinister
implication to these two unfortunate gentlemen), and that he could
not think of putting to sea.  Once the "storm" had blown over, the
tug started out across the blue waters of the Gulf of Mexico.  But
now Bracken and Kaffenburgh were informed for the first time it was
impossible to consider putting into any port of the Republic of
Mexico, since to do so would cause international complications and
compel the revocation of the captain's license.  In desperation the
Hummel interests offered the captain five thousand dollars in cash
to disregard his instructions and put into Tampico, but the worthy
sea-dog was adamant.  It was probably worth five thousand dollars
to him to see three gentry of this pattern so much put about.

While Dodge and his accomplices were dallying in the harbor of
Galveston, Jesse was taking advantage of his opportunity to proceed
at once by railroad to Alice, Texas, which at that time was the
furthermost southern point reached by any railway in the direction
of Brownsville.  On his arrival, he at once applied to Captain John
R. Hughes, commanding Company D of the Texas Rangers, who received
him with great joy and ordered a detachment of the Rangers to meet
the tug at Point Isabelle at the mouth of the Rio Grande River on
the border of Mexico.  In the meantime, Jesse started on a toilsome
stage journey to Brownsville, across one hundred and seventy miles
of desert, which occupied two days and nights, and necessitated his
going without sleep for that period.  During the trip Jesse heard
no word of English and had as his associates only Mexican
cattlemen.  Every fifteen miles a fresh relay of broncos was
hitched to the stage and after a few moments' rest the misery began
again.

Jesse had been hurrying toward Brownsville by stage while Dodge,
Kaffenburgh, and Bracken were landing at Point Isabelle, where they
were kept under close surveillance by Sergeant Tom Ross of the
Rangers.  Thence they took the train to Brownsville, registering at
the Miller House under the assumed names of C. F. Dougherty, A.
Koontzman, and E. M. Barker, all of Oklahoma.  But, although they
knew it not, Sergeant Tom was at their elbow, and had Dodge
attempted to cross the border into Mexico he would instantly have
been placed under arrest.

As Brownsville was within the Southern District of the Federal
Court of Texas, Jesse decided not to arrest Dodge until he should
actually attempt flight, and when Dodge and his companions, on the
following morning, February 15th, entered the stage (the same upon
which Jesse had arrived) and started for Alice, Jesse and Tom Ross
procured the best horses they could find and started after them,
keeping just in sight of the stage.  Dodge's intention in making
this move was to take the Mexican International Railway at Alice
and cross over to Mexico via Laredo.

Jesse and Ross covered the seventy-four miles from Brownsville to
Santa La Cruz Ranch by four in the afternoon, which was fairly
strenuous work for a New York detective, and here found themselves
so sore and exhausted from their ride that they were glad to hire a
pair of horses and buggy with which to complete the journey to
Alice.  Luckily they were able to get into telephonic communication
with various ranch owners along the road and arrange to have fresh
relays of horses supplied to them every twenty miles, and here also
Jesse called up Captain Hughes at Alice, and suggested that he
substitute for the regular night clerk at the City Hotel one of the
privates of the Rangers by the name of Harrod.

Dodge and his companions arrived in Alice on February 17th, and, as
Jesse had anticipated, repaired at once to the City Hotel, where,
inasmuch as they were dry from the dust of their trip and depressed
by lack of society, they entered at once into an enthusiastic and
confidential friendship with the man behind the counter in the
hotel office, sublimely ignorant that they were unfolding to a
member of the Texas Rangers all their most secret intentions.
Harrod was just as glad to see Dodge as Dodge apparently was to see
Harrod, and kindly offered to assist the fugitive to get into
Mexico in any way that the latter desired.  Dodge, for his part,
took advantage of his usefulness to the extent of requesting him to
purchase them railroad tickets, the plan being to leave Alice the
following morning for Monterey, Mexico.  Three hours after the
stage bearing Dodge and his party pulled up at the City Hotel, Tom
Ross and Jesse drove in behind a pair of fagged-out broncos at two
in the morning.  Jesse had had no sleep of any sort and no proper
nourishment for five days, and had just strength enough left to
drag himself up one flight of stairs and tumble into bed, from
which he did not emerge for many hours.

In the meantime day broke and Dodge, Kaffenburgh, and Bracken,
having breakfasted, drove comfortably down to the International
Railway Station and settled themselves in the smoker, but they had
no sooner given this direct evidence of their intention before
Captain Hughes entered and placed Dodge under arrest.  The latter's
surprise may be appreciated when it is stated that from the time
the three had left Houston, they had no idea that they were being
followed and believed that they had completely foiled Jesse and his
assistants.

While Jesse had been chasing Dodge across the desert, his lawyers
had not been idle and had secured at Austin another extradition
warrant from Governor Lanham, who, on receiving news of the arrest,
promptly instructed Captain Hughes by wire to assume charge of the
prisoner and to deliver him into the hands of the New York officer
to be conveyed to New York.

There now began such a legal battle as the State of Texas had never
known.  Hummel had been forced into his last ditch and was fighting
desperately for life.  Through Kaffenburgh he at once applied for a
new writ of habeas corpus in Nueces County and engaged counsel at
Corpus Christi to assist in fighting for the release of the
prisoner.  Precisely as Hummel had intended, Chief Wright of Nueces
rode into Alice and demanded the prisoner from Captain Hughes.  As
Hummel had NOT intended, Captain Hughes refused to surrender the
prisoner and told Chief Wright to go to--well, he told him that he
intended to obey his commander-in-chief, the Governor of Texas.

On February 20th, Hummel, through Kaffenburgh, attempted to get
another writ of habeas corpus in Bee County, and promptly the Bee
chief came buzzing over and demanded Dodge, but to him Hughes
replied even as he had spoken to Wright.

Excitement in Alice had now reached such a pitch that Judge Burns,
of the Federal Court, in Houston, ordered United States Marshal
John W. Vann, of Alice, to assume charge of the prisoner.  The
indomitable Hughes, however, paid no more attention to the United
States Marshal than he had to the local chiefs.  But the situation
was so delicate and the clash of authority might so easily have
resulted in bloodshed that it was finally agreed by all parties
that the best thing to do was to have the prisoner returned to
Houston in the JOINT custody of Captain Hughes of the Rangers and
the United States Marshal.

Jesse, through his counsel, in proper course, made application to
forfeit Dodge's bond and remand him to jail, but the Hummel
attorneys finally induced the Court, on the plea that to confine
Dodge in jail would be detrimental to his already badly impaired
health, to permit the prisoner to go free on a greatly increased
bond, nevertheless restricting his movements to Harris County,
Texas.

While Jesse had fought a winning battle up to this point he was at
the end of his resources so far as the extradition of the prisoner
was concerned, for Dodge was now at liberty, pending the decisions
upon the habeas corpus proceedings of the United States Circuit
Court of Appeals at Fort Worth, and the United States Supreme Court
at Washington.  But his orders were to BRING DODGE BACK TO New
York.  Hence, with the aid of some new men sent him from the North,
he commenced an even closer surveillance of the prisoner than ever
before by both day and night.

Meantime Kaffenburgh departed for New York, fleeing from the wrath
of Judge Burns, who had issued a summons for him for contempt of
the Federal Court on the ground that he had induced Dodge to
attempt to jump his bond.  In place of the blustering Kaffenburgh
was sent another member of the famous law firm of Howe and Hummel,
David May, an entirely different type of man.  May was as mild as a
day in June--as urbane as Kaffenburgh had been insolent.  He
fluttered into Houston like a white dove of peace with the
proverbial olive branch in his mouth.  From now on the tactics
employed by the representatives of Hummel were conciliatory in the
extreme.  Mr. May, however, did not long remain in Houston, as it
was apparent that there was nothing to be done by either side
pending the action of the courts, and in any event Dodge was
abundantly supplied with local counsel.  The time had now come when
Hummel must have begun to feel that the fates were against him and
that a twenty-year term in state prison was a concrete possibility
even for him.

In the meantime, Dodge and Bracken had taken up their headquarters
at the Rice Hotel in the most expensive suite of rooms in the
house, a new scheme for getting the prisoner beyond the reach of
the New York courts apparently having been concocted.  Dodge was
now indulged in every conceivable luxury and vice.  He was plunged
into every sort of excess, there was no debauchery which Bracken
could supply that was not his and their rapid method of existence
was soon the talk of the county and continued to be so for ten long
months.  There is more than one way to kill a cat and more than one
method of wiping out the only existing witness against a desperate
man striving to escape the consequences of crime.

Dodge's daily routine was somewhat as follows:  He never slept at
his own hotel, but arose in the morning between ten and eleven
o'clock, when he was at once visited by Bracken and supplied with
numerous drinks in lieu of the breakfast for which he never had any
desire.  At noon the two would have luncheon with more drinks.  In
the afternoon they would retire to the poolrooms and play the
races, and, when the races were over, they would then visit the
faro banks and gamble until midnight or later.  Later on they would
proceed to another resort on Louisiana Street where Dodge really
lived.  Here his day may be said to have begun and here he spent
most of his money, frequently paying out as much as fifty dollars a
night for wine and invariably ending in a beastly state of
intoxication.  It is quite probable that never in the history of
debauchery has any one man ever been so indulged in excesses of
every sort for the same period of time as Dodge was during the
summer and fall of 1904.  The fugitive never placed his foot on
mother earth.  If they were going only a block, Bracken called for
a cab, and the two seemed to take a special delight in making
Jesse, as Jerome's representative, spend as much money in cab hire
as possible.  The Houston jehus never again experienced so
profitable a time as they did during Dodge's wet season; and the
life of dissipation was continued until, from time to time, the
prisoner became so weak from its effects that he was forced to go
under the care of a physician.  A few days of abstinence always
restored his vitality and he would then start out upon another
round of pleasure.

During this period Jesse maintained a close and vigilant personal
espionage over the prisoner.  For over ten months he slept less
than four hours each day, his fatigue being increased by the
constant apprehension of treachery among his own men, and the
necessity of being ever on the alert to prevent some move on the
part of the defense to spirit the prisoner away.  During the summer
attempts were repeatedly made to evade the vigilance of Jesse and
his men and several desperate dashes were frustrated by them,
including one occasion when Bracken succeeded in rushing Dodge as
far as Galveston, where they were forced to abandon their design.

From time to time Bracken would disappear from Houston for a week
or ten days, stating on his return that he had been to New York,
after which there was invariably some new move to get the prisoner
away.  Time and space prevent giving a detailed account of all the
marches and counter-marches that took place in this battle of wit
against wit.

In August, 1904, Bracken made one of his periodical visits to New
York, and when he returned sought out Jesse and said: "Blocher, you
might as well be a good fellow and get yours while you can.  I mean
that Dodge is not going back to New York, even if it cost a million
dollars to prevent it."  A few days later Bracken sent a gambler
named Warner to Jesse, who offered the latter thirty-five hundred
dollars to get "lost" long enough for the prisoner to slip over to
Mexico.  Acting upon the advice of his attorney, Jesse encouraged
this attempt, under the belief that if he could get the Hummel
forces in the position of having attempted to bribe him the
prisoner's bail could then be forfeited and Dodge himself taken
into custody.  Hummel became wary, however, and apparently
abandoned for the time the idea of bribery.  Later on Bracken again
disappeared.  On his return a marked change was noticeable in his
demeanor and Jesse observed that he was in constant consultation
with Dodge, from which the detective drew the inference that some
last desperate move was to be made towards the escape of the
prisoner.

On one occasion Jesse saw Bracken showing Dodge a map and some
drawings on paper, which so excited his suspicions that he followed
the two with unremitting assiduity, and within a day or two was
rewarded through Bracken's carelessness with an opportunity for
going through the latter's coat pockets in the billiard room.  Here
he found a complete set of plans worked out in every detail for
spiriting the prisoner from San Antonio into Mexico during the
State Fair.  These plans were very elaborate, every item having
been planned out from the purchase of tickets, and passing of
baggage through the customs, to hotel accommodation in the City of
Mexico and Tampico, and steamship tickets from Tampico to Europe.

The plan had been to secure permission from the Court for Dodge to
leave Houston long enough ostensibly to attend the fair at San
Antonio and to "lose" him during the excitement and crowded
condition of the city at that time.

It is, of course, needless to say that these plans were abandoned
when Bracken discovered that Jesse had been forewarned.

Almost immediately thereafter the Circuit Court of Appeals at Fort
Worth, Texas, decided one of the habeas corpus cases adversely to
Dodge, but it still permitted him to retain his liberty pending the
final determination of the questions involved by the Supreme Court
at Washington.

The Hummel forces were apparently losing hope, however, for early
in October another attempt was made to bribe Jesse.  Bracken
entered his room one evening and informed him that he could get his
own price if he would only be a good fellow, and even went so far
as to exhibit a quantity of money which he stated was twenty-five
thousand dollars.  The only result of this offer was to lead Jesse
to redouble his precautions, for he argued that the situation must
indeed be acute when such an offer could be deemed worth while.
Thereafter it was obvious that the revelry of Dodge and his
companions was on the increase.  Accordingly Jesse added to his
force of assistants.

On December 2, 1904, Nathaniel Cohen, another member of the firm of
Howe and Hummel, arrived at Houston, and the next day the Supreme
Court at Washington decided the appeal in the habeas corpus against
the prisoner, who was at once ordered by Judge Burns into the
custody of United States Marshall William M. Hansen.

Things looked black indeed for Dodge and blacker still for Hummel.
How the little attorney, eating his midday lunch four thousand
miles away, at Pontin's restaurant on Franklin Street, must have
trembled in his patent leather boots!  His last emissary, Cohen, at
once procured an assistant by the name of Brookman and with him
proceeded to Wharton County, Texas, where they secured a new writ
of habeas corpus and induced the local sheriff, one Rich, to swear
in a posse comitatus of one hundred men for the purpose of coming
to Houston to take the prisoner by force of arms out of the hands
of the United States Marshal.

This was one of the most daring and desperate attempts made in
recent years to frustrate the law.  Jesse believes that the real
object of this posse was to precipitate a fight between themselves
and the Federal authorities.  It is not inconceivable that in such
an event Dodge might either have escaped or been killed.  The men
composing the posse were of the most desperate character, and
consisted largely of the so-called "feud factions" of Wharton
County, known as "The Wood Peckers" and "The Jay Birds."  Jesse has
been informed, on what he regards as reliable authority, that this
move cost the Hummel forces fifteen thousand dollars and that each
member of the posse received one hundred dollars for his
contemplated services in the "rescue" of the prisoner.  But civil
war, even on a small scale, cannot be indulged in without some
inkling of the facts becoming known to the authorities, and prior
to the receipt of the mandate of the Supreme Court, Judge Burns
ordered the prisoner removed to Galveston for safe keeping.

Thus the long, expensive, and arduous struggle came finally to an
end, for Judge Burns in due course ordered that Charles F. Dodge
should be conveyed to New York in the personal custody of the
United States Marshal and delivered by him to the New York
authorities "within the borders of that State."  Such an order was,
of course, exceedingly unusual, if not almost unheard of, but it
was rendered absolutely necessary by the powerful influence and
resources, as well as the unscrupulous character, of those
interested in securing Dodge's disappearance.

In order to thwart any plans for releasing the prisoner by violence
or otherwise, and to prevent delay through the invoking of legal
technicalities, Hansen and Jesse decided to convey Dodge to New
York by water, and on the 16th of December the marshal and his five
deputies boarded a Mallory Line steamer at Galveston and arrived in
New York with their prisoner on the evening of December 23d.

Dodge reached New York a physical wreck.  How he was induced to
tell the whole truth after he had pleaded guilty to the charge
against him is a story in itself.  A complete reaction from his
dissipation now occurred and for days his life was despaired of.
Jesse, too, was, as the expression is, "all in," and the only
persons who were still able to appreciate the delights of New York
were the stalwart marshal and his boys, who for some time were
objects of interest as they strolled along Broadway and drank "deep
and hearty" in the cafes.  To the assistants in the District
Attorney's office they were heroes and were treated as such.

How Dodge finally testified against Hummel on the witness stand has
already been told.  As they say downtown, if Jerome had never done
anything else, he would have "made good" by locking up Abe Hummel.
No one ever believed he would do it.  But Jerome never would have
locked up Hummel without Jesse.  And, as Jesse says with a laugh,
leaning back in his chair and taking a long pull on his cigar, "I
guess I would not do it again--no, I WOULD not do it again for all
the money you could give me.  The wonder is that I came out of it
alive."  When the reader comes to think about it he will probably
agree with him.



P. H. Woodward


Adventures in the Secret Service of the Post-Office Department*


* The author of the pages that follow was chief special agent of
the Secret Service of the United States Post-Office Department
during pioneer and romantic days.  The curious adventures related
are partly from his own observation, and partly from the notebooks
of fellow officers, operating in many sections of the Country.

The stories are true, although, of course, justice demands that in
some cases persons and places be usually disguised under fictitious
names.

The stories have interest not only for their exciting play of
honest wits against dishonest, but also for the cautions they sound
against believing things "too good to be true" from the pen of
strangers.


There is a class of post-office thieves who make a specialty of
rifling the registered letters that pass through their hands in
transit on journeys of greater or less length.  Some of them have
managed operations very shrewdly, in the evident belief that they
had discovered an infallible method for doing the work and at the
same time escaping detection.  Too late they generally learn by sad
experience that no patents can be taken out for the protection of
crime.

In this class of cases something tangible always remains to exhibit
the peculiar style of workmanship belonging to each; and it would
often surprise the uninitiated to learn how many traits of
character, what indexes of habit and vocation, can be picked up by
careful study of the minute points presented for inspection.
Unless, however, an agent cultivates a taste for thoroughness even
to details and trifles that might at first view appear utterly
insignificant, he will never succeed in interpreting the
hieroglyphics.

At intervals of two or three weeks, beginning in the summer of
1871, registered packages passing to and fro from Chicago to a town
in the interior of Dakota Territory, which for convenience will be
called Wellington,--though that was not its name,--were reported to
the department as rifled.  As the season wore on, the complaints
increased in frequency.  Under the old method of doing business at
headquarters, which often amounted practically to a distribution of
the cases about equally "among the boys," the agent stationed at
Chicago received most of them at first; then a part were sent to an
agent in Iowa; and as the number multiplied, Furay, at Omaha, was
favored with an occasional sprinkling.  Under the present more
perfect system, great care is taken to group together all the
complaints growing out of each series of depredations, to locate
the seat of trouble by comparisons carefully made in the department
itself, and to give everything bearing on the subject to the
officer specifically charged with the investigation.

March came around before Mr. Furay found time to give personal
attention to this particular thief.  He then passed over the route
to Wellington, eighty miles by stagecoach from the nearest railroad
station, with ten intermediate offices.  All the packages remained
over night at Sioux City, Iowa, a fact sufficiently important to
invite close scrutiny; but the detective soon became satisfied that
he must look elsewhere for the robber.  His suspicions were next
directed to another office, where also the mails lay over night;
but the postmaster bore a countenance so open and honest that he
too was eliminated from the problem.

He continued on to Wellington, skirmishing along the line, and
observing the faces of the postmasters; but these studies in
physiognomy threw no light on the mystery, as the officials of the
department on the route, though far removed from central
supervision, seemed to be all that their affectionate uncle at
Washington could wish.  On the return trip the detective was
equally observant and equally perplexed.  At that season the stage
stopped for the night at Hannibal; but there, likewise, the
postmaster shared the honest looks that seemed to prevail through
eastern Dakota.

Proceeding on, the passengers dined at Raven's Nest, where one
Michael Mahoney, Sr., kept a small store and the post-office,
running also--with the aid of a young son and a son-in-law--a farm.
The store was managed by Michael Mahoney, Jr., a married son, who
happened to be absent both when the special agent went up and when
he returned.  The face of the old man indicated that he was
vicious, ignorant, and unscrupulous; but clearly he was not sharp
enough to execute nice work like that under investigation.

With the exception of a general knowledge of the offices, the
special agent returned but little wiser for the trip, and
concluded, as the best that could be done under the circumstances,
to allow the bird to flutter a little longer before renewing the
hunt.  Meanwhile the thief grew more reckless, and the papers that
came to Mr. Furay, though covering a fraction only of the
depredations, located the thief on the lower end of the route,
within fifty miles of the terminus.

During the summer one or two other agents took up the matter
cursorily, but made no discoveries.  In the meantime Mr. Furay was
kept too busily occupied with a succession of important cases in
Nebraska to give much thought to the outlying territory of Dakota.
At length, in September, he went carefully over the papers that had
accumulated during his late prolonged absences, and soon knew
exactly where to look for the chap who had so long plundered the
public with impunity.

For some time Chicago had been closing registered package envelopes
with wax, which, on this route at least, effectually secured them
against molestation.  Imitating the example, Camden, Dakota, began
to do the same; but, having no seal suitable for the purpose,
improvised a substitute by using the flat surface of a rasp.

Camden placed the wax near each end of the envelope, which
materially interfered with the game of the thief, because it was
just here that he operated.  Evidently piqued that a rural
postmaster should presume to outwit him, he studied hard to devise
some means for opening these particular packages without leaving
such traces of his handiwork as would attract the notice of other
officials through whose hands they might subsequently pass.  The
effort was crowned with a measurable degree of success, for Mr.
Furay, at the general overhauling referred to, was the first to
discover that the seal had been tampered with.

As it was necessary to break one of the seals, the object of the
robber was to restore it as nearly as possible to its original
appearance; and to effect this he used a dampened thimble, rolling
it over the wax while the latter was hot.  There was but one
envelope of the kind in the lot, but it told the whole story to the
eye that could penetrate its meaning.  As the thimble passed along
the edge, it left the mark of the rim, then a smooth, narrow band,
followed by pointed elevations closely resembling continuous lines,
thus:

========
--------
........
........

On the opposite side of the same seal the wax flattened out so as
to cover a good deal of surface; and, to give it the desired
appearance, the manipulator resorted to the thimble again, but this
time USED A DIFFERENT ONE, the indentations on the surface being
perceptibly finer and more shallow.

The violation of that single seal betrayed the thief, for the
detective at once inferred that the job was done in a store where
the operator had access to a variety of thimbles.  Only one was
required; and no person but a merchant would be likely to have more
than one within convenient reach.  In a store, however, it would be
natural to take down a boxful, and place it on the counter, to be
selected from at random.  One is picked up, used, and thrown back.
The operator now finds another spot that requires attention, and
without waiting to hunt for the thimble that has already served as
a seal,--for the wax is cooling and no time must be lost,--grasps
the first that comes to hand, too absorbed in the main issue to
give a thought to what would pass as an insignificant subsidiary
trifle.  No rascal is sharp enough to guard every point,--a general
fact that illustrates over and over again, in the experience of
man, the seminal truth that in a mercenary and physical as well as
in a high and spiritual, sense there is neither wisdom nor profit
outside of the limits of absolute integrity and unflinching
uprightness.

The detective laid aside the papers with a light heart, knowing
that at last he was complete master of the situation.  Below Camden
on the infested route the post-office was kept in a store at two
points only, and in one of those no thimbles were sold.  The clew
pointed unerringly to Raven's Nest as the spot where alone the
requisite conditions to account for the imprint on the violated
seal were to be found.  Thither the officer accordingly went; and
the moment his eye rested on Michael Mahoney, Jr., he recognized
the heaven-branded features of a thief.

Returning to Sioux City, he telegraphed to another agent, who had a
large number of the cases growing out of the robberies, to come on
at once.  The two men took stations, one on each side of Raven's
Nest, and in thirty hours they arrested the youthful criminal, who
in the interval stole four decoy letters, and paid a portion of the
contents to one of the officers who was testing him.

Mr. Furay collected from the thief and his relatives the full
amount stolen from the mails during the entire continuance of the
depredations, restoring the money to the rightful owners dollar for
dollar.  Young Mahoney made a written confession, supplemented by
three or four codicils relating to items which, to use his own
language, "at first did not to me occur."  He was tried the
following February, and sentenced to the penitentiary for the term
of three years.

Within fifteen days from the time when the doors of the prison were
closed upon the son, the villainous old father, acting perhaps on
the theory that no two shots ever strike in exactly the same place,
began also to rob the mails.  In due time Mr. Furay again appeared
on the scene and took the old reprobate away a prisoner.  When the
trial came on, a material witness for the prosecution happened to
be absent, the lack of whose testimony proved fatal to the case,
for after hanging a day and a night, the jury brought in a verdict
of acquittal.



AN ERRING SHEPHERD


The ingenuity and perseverance of the fraternity of swindlers is
only equaled by the gullibility and patience of their dupes.
During the flush times that followed the war, immense fortunes were
suddenly acquired by a class of cheats who operated on the
credulity of the public through gift enterprises, lotteries, and
other kindred schemes.  Most of the large concerns established
their headquarters in New York City, flooding the entire country,
particularly the South and West, with lithographic circulars,
written apparently with the pen for the exclusive benefit of the
recipient, and showing how fortunes could be securely made by
remitting specified sums to the houses in question.  Some of the
bogus firms simply pocketed the cash of correspondents without
pretending to render any equivalent whatever; while others, no more
honest, but a little more politic, sent forth worthless jewelry and
other stuff by the bushel.

One of the most villainous and at the same time successful devices
was built up on the offer of counterfeit currency at a heavy
discount.  In substance, the circulars, emanating from different
parties, and from the same parties under different names, were all
alike.  They usually began with an insidious compliment to the
person addressed, to the effect that from trustworthy sources the
writer had heard of him as a man of more than ordinary capacity and
shrewdness, and, emboldened by the high estimate placed upon his
abilities by persons well qualified to judge, had selected him as
the very individual to aid in securing a fortune for both with
"absolute safety."  The circular usually goes on to state that the
writer is a first-class engraver,--indeed "one of the most expert
in the United States,"--while his partner is a first-class printer.
Hence the firm possess unrivaled facilities for imitating the
national currency.  The recipient is particuarly cautioned to
beware of a class of miscreants who infest the city of New York and
advertise throughout the country the goods that he manufactures,
but send nothing except rubbish.  The "original Doctor Jacobs"
excoriates unmercifully the whole tribe of swindlers whose
rascalities debauch and bring odium upon the trade.  He exhorts the
gentleman of great reputed "shrewdness and sagacity" to observe the
utmost caution in conducting operations, and gives him explicit
directions how to forward the purchase-money.

Several years ago a preacher of the gospel, stationed not far from
the northern frontier of the republic, received by mail one of the
seductive missives of Ragem & Co., of New York City.  The douceur
opened with the usual complimentary references to the peculiar
personal fitness of the clergyman for the proposed enterprise, and
went on to state that, in exchange for genuine greenbacks, Ragem &
Co. would furnish in the proportion of fifty to one imitations so
absolutely perfect that the most experienced bank officers could
not distinguish the difference.  Rev. Zachariah Sapp,--for such was
the euphonious name of the preacher,--after an attentive perusal of
the flattering proposal, deposited the document in his coat-pocket
for convenience of reference.  Having pondered the subject for a
day or two, he decided to write to Ragem & Co. for more explicit
information.

Divining with the peculiar instinct of the guild the character of
the fish now nibbling at the naked hook, the cheat resolved to risk
a little bait, and accordingly sent by return mail a genuine one-
dollar note, with a written invitation both for a reply and a
personal conference.

Never before did the Rev. Zachariah Sapp subject a piece of paper
to such scrutiny.  Both with the naked eye and with a microscope,--
a relic of collegiate days,--he studied the engravings and filigree
work.  Detail by detail he compared the supposed imitation with
bills of known genuineness without being able to discover the
slightest point of variation between them.  Paper, printing, and
engraving seemed to be absolutely perfect.  While the study was
progressing, the imagination of the clergyman soared through the
empyrean of dazzling expectations.  Why continue to toil hard for a
small pittance when the golden apples were hanging within easy
reach?  Why drag out an existence in penury when wealth and its
joys were thrust upon him?

Zachariah, however, was prudent and thrifty--indeed rather more
thrifty in the estimation of parishioners than befitted one who
held by right of faith a title-deed to mansions in the skies.
Almost as soon would he risk his future inheritance as peril on a
doubtful venture the few hundred dollars snugly saved up for a wet
day by prudence and economy.

Not willing to rely entirely on his own judgment, he rather
reluctantly decided to call on a banker in an adjacent town, with
whom he enjoyed a slight acquaintance.  In thinking the matter over
he was greatly perplexed to determine how to introduce the subject.
Of course it would not answer to allow the cashier to fathom his
secret purpose, and yet he was oppressed with a vague consciousness
that only a translucent film hid his thought from the world.  Once
or twice, in driving over on the unfamiliar errand, weak and
irresolute he half resolved to turn back, but greed finally
prevailed, and he kept on to the village.

With a strong but unsatisfactory effort to appear at ease, he
sauntered into the bank.  After the usual interchange of greetings,
he nervously remarked, "Brother Hyde, as I was coming this way to-
day to call on Brother Tompkins, I have taken the liberty to drop
in to ask you a question on a matter in your line."

"Very well," replied the banker, "I shall be happy to serve you."

"I had a transaction a few days ago," resumed the clergyman, "with
a peddler,--an entire stranger to me,--who, in making change, gave
me a number of bills which I have reason to suspect are
counterfeits.  I desire your opinion."

"Please let me see them," said Mr. Hyde.

He took the one-dollar note from the hand of the unfaithful pastor,
and after scanning it a moment, inquired, "What is the matter with
it?"

"Is it good?" queried the anxious owner.

"I wish I had my safe full of the same sort," answered the banker.
"There is nothing bad about the bill.  What makes you think so?
Perhaps you have shown me the wrong one.  Let me see the others."

"I must have left the rest at home," replied the preacher, fumbling
among the compartments of the pocket-book.

Having accomplished the object of his mission without perpetrating,
as he thought, any disastrous blunder, Mr. Sapp brought the
interview to a close with a few commonplace remarks, and hurried
away to enjoy in solitary self-communion the thick-crowding visions
of future affluence.

With the last doubt satisfactorily overcome, the plans of the
prospective millionaire rapidly took shape.  He could raise five
hundred dollars, which at the proposed rate of interchange would
purchase twenty-five thousand of the "absolutely perfect
imitations."  The sum seemed vast--incalculable.  His imagination,
hitherto bound down by the narrow circumstances of remote rural
life, staggered while trying to grasp the conception of so much
wealth.  Like the mysteries of time and space, it appeared too
grand for comprehension.  Then his reveries strayed into another
channel.  What noble fellows were Ragem & Co.  Why, among forty
millions of people, did they pick out him, an unknown clergyman,
living in an obscure place hundreds of miles from the metropolis,
to be the favored recipient of untold wealth?  Surely, this is a
special Providence.  Not a sparrow falleth to the ground without
His knowledge.  He watches over his own.  Suddenly the erring
clergyman feels a terrible pull at his heart-strings.  What right
has he, about to betray a sacred trust, and engage in operations
branded as infamous by the laws of the land, to claim the watchful
care of Providence?  Will not the all-seeing eye follow him?  Will
not the omnipotent hand strike him heavily in wrath?  The poor man
wipes the cold perspiration from his forehead, and wonders if it
will pay.

But he has paltered too long, and now the devil claims him for his
own.

Returning home, Sapp wrote to Ragem & Co., stating the amount of
his available resources, and saying that upon a given day and hour
he would meet them at the appointed rendezvous.  On the following
Sunday the congregation were startled at the close of the afternoon
services by an extraordinary announcement from the pulpit.

Before pronouncing the benediction the pastor said: "I take this
opportunity to communicate to you collectively a piece of personal
intelligence which I have hitherto kept secret.  Under the will of
a relative who recently died in the State of Michigan, I inherit a
large sum--to me, with my humble wants, a very large sum.  By
appointment, I am to meet the executor of the estate this week in
New York City to receive the first installment of the legacy.  I do
not propose to leave you, my dear parishioners, but to remain among
you and toil with you as I have done for so many years.  A goodly
portion at least of my inheritance I intend to invest in this
community, that neighbors and friends may share jointly in my
prosperity.  I trust I may be guided to make a wise use of the
talents thus unexpectedly, and I may say providentially, committed
to my keeping.  We know from the teachings of Scripture that wealth
brings great responsibilities, and that we shall be held to a
strict account for the manner in which we employ it.  May your
prayers go with me."

The congregation crowded around the pastor with congratulations.
Particularly demonstrative were the ebullitions of two or three
brothers who saw a chance of exchanging sundry unsalable
possessions for slices in the inheritance.

Mr. Sapp reached New York City in the evening, and the momentous
interview was to take place at an early hour the next day.  Sleep
came in brief and fitful snatches.  But the stars roll on in their
majestic spheres, regardless of mortal hopes and fears.  At length
day broke, when the preacher rose from bed anxious and unrefreshed.
A little before the appointed time he proceeded to a certain
building, and having mounted two flights of stairs, saw the magic
number on the door in front of him.  As the clock struck he
entered.  Agreeably to a preconcerted plan, he wiped the right
corner of his mouth with a white handkerchief, and nodded three
times.  The only person in the room, a well-dressed and apparently
affable gentleman, responded by wiping the left corner of his mouth
with a red silk handkerchief, and nodding three times.  The signal
is correctly answered: it is he!  So far all works beautifully,
with every promise kept.  The bill was a perfect imitation, the
engraver is on hand to a second.


             "Two truths are told,
     As happy prologues to the swelling act
     Of the imperial theme."


The fellow passing under the name of Ragem & Co. welcomed the new
arrival cordially.  "Ah," said he "your promptness and
circumspection show that I am not disappointed in my man.  I see
that you come up to the full measure of my expectations.  Do you
know I am a remarkable judge of character?  In fact, I seldom or
never make a mistake.  We are both in luck."

"I was trained to punctuality from early youth," replied the
preacher; and proceeding directly to business, without further
circumlocution, continued, "I succeeded in raising five hundred
dollars, which entitles me under the agreement to twenty-five
thousand."

From an inner pocket, after removing a number of pins, he produced
six one hundred dollar notes, saying, by way of explanation, "For
greater security I converted my funds into bills of large
denomination.  One I reserve for contingencies; the other five are
for you."

"Your money is here in the safe," said Ragem, taking the five
notes, and turning toward the safe as if to unlock it.  But the
scoundrel evidently reasoned that it would be silly to remain
content with the five when he could just as easily capture the
sixth.

Walking back, he remarked, "I want to show you that my large bills
are just as perfect as the small ones"; and, as if for purposes of
comparison, he took the remaining note from the hand of the
clergyman.

At this moment began a fearful knocking on a side door, that
threatened the speedy demolition of the frail barrier.  "Run, run,"
whispered Ragem, as if in the extremity of terror, "the police are
on us."

The preacher needed no second invitation, fear of exposure giving
wings to his feet.  Almost at a bound he cleared the two flights of
stairs and emerged into the street, walking several blocks, and
turning a number of corners before he dared to look back.

The bona fide occupant of the room where these parties met had no
share whatever in the nefarious transactions carried on there.
Through the treachery of the janitor, Ragem was permitted at
certain hours to make use of the apartment for the purpose of
keeping appointments with his victims.  A confederate stationed on
the outside delivered the knocks as soon as customers were plucked
and it became desirable to get rid of their company.  Occasional
hints of improper practices reached the ear of the real lessee, but
these had never yet taken such shape as to give a decisive clew to
the trouble, dupes for the most part pocketing their losses in
silence.

After an interval of two or three hours Mr. Sapp plucked up courage
to return.  Having mounted the stairs, he entered the room warily.
His late partner was not there.  A stalwart gentleman, who seemed
to be the proprietor, 1ooked up inquiringly, and was not a little
puzzled when the visitor supplemented the performance of wiping the
right corner of his mouth by three deliberate nods.  "What can I do
for you to-day?" inquired the gentleman, rising.

"You are, I presume, a partner of Mr. Ragem," answered Sapp.  "I
see he is out.  Our business this morning was unfortunately
interrupted by the police, and I have returned to complete it."

"What business?" asked the proprietor, in undisguised astonishment.

Now the preacher made the very natural mistake of supposing that
the surprise manifested by his interlocutor was a mere matter of
policy and caution.  Hence he proceeded to explain.  "Ragem must
have told you.  I am the gentleman who gave him the five hundred
dollars, and he said that my twenty-five thousand were locked up in
the safe."

The proprietor did not wait to hear more, but seizing the
affrighted creature by the collar, thundered forth, "I have heard
of you before.  You are the villain, are you, who has been turning
my office into a den of thieves?  I have caught you at last!"

Awaking to a partial comprehension of the situation, the poor
wretch stammered forth, "There must be some mistake.  My name is a--
is a--is a Smith--Smith--John Smith."

"John Smith, is it?" growled the proprietor.  "Well, all I have to
say is, John Smith, if not the biggest is the most numerous rascal
in the city.  John, come along to the police station."

And John went, billows of trouble rolling over him as the waters of
the Red Sea closed over Pharaoh.  Vain the effort to recall
consolatory texts pertinent to the occasion!  He was sorely
chastened indeed, but the stripes were inflicted not in love but in
wrath.  He mourned, yet whence could he look for comfort?

To avoid a worse fate, the prisoner revealed his identity,
exhibited the correspondence from "Ragem & Co.," and made a full
statement of the facts.  The painful news reached the church
shortly after the return of the pastor, when his pulpit career came
to an ignominious end.  He soon removed to the far West, hoping to
bury his disgrace in the shades of the primeval forest.

The fall of Rev. Zachariah Sapp sounds a note of warning not
without its lessons.  The only safety in dealing with temptation is
to repel its insidious approaches from the outset.  Whoever listens
in patience to the siren whisper is half lost already.  Human
experience abundantly confirms the divine wisdom of the command,
"Get thee behind me, Satan," as the one sole safe way of meeting
evil advances.  At the close of well-spent, useful lives, myriads
can thank a kind Providence, not that they have been stronger than
others who have turned out differently, but that they have been
tried less.  Walking among unseen perils, none can without danger
of ruin discard even for a moment the armor of honesty and truth.



AN ASPIRANT FOR CONGRESS


A few years ago, the "Hon." John Whimpery Brass, of Georgia, one of
the "thoughtful patriots" of the period, who now and then found
time to lay aside the cares of statecraft to nurse little private
jobs of his own, allured by the seductive offers of "Wogan & Co."
of New York City, wrote to that somewhat mythical concern proposing
to become their agent for the circulation of the "queer."  Even
after receiving the first installment of their wares, the honorable
gentleman did not comprehend that the firm dealt exclusively in
sawdust, not in currency.  He wrote again, complaining that, after
a journey of sixty miles over a rough road to the nearest reliable
express office, he found nothing but a worthless package, marked
"C. O. D.," awaiting him.  Did Wogan & Co. distrust either his
parts or fidelity?  He ventured to assert that no man in the State
could serve them so effectually.  He had just run for Congress, and
though beaten at the polls by "fraud," intended to contest the seat
with the chances of success in his favor.  The mountaineers among
whom he lived did not care whether the money in their pockets was
good or bad so long as it circulated.  He could put thousands of
counterfeits afloat without the slightest fear of detection.  His
constituency believed in him and would stand by him.  Currency was
very scarce in that congressional district, and it would really be
doing his people a great favor to give them more.  After setting
forth the mutual benefits to accrue from trusting him, he appealed
to Wogan & Co. with the vehemence and energy of the sewing-machine
man, or life-insurance agent, to send on the goods without further
delay.  They should never regret dealing with him, his character
and standing being a sufficient guaranty that he could not play
false.  He was acting in good faith, and expected like treatment in
return.

Unfortunately for the political aspirations of "Hon." John Whimpery
Brass, the authorities not long after made a descent upon the den
of Wogan & Co., finding a great many letters from credulous fools,
and a large supply of sawdust--their only stock in trade.  The
missives of the prospective congressman were published, thus
gaining much more extensive currency than he proposed to give to
the imitation greenbacks.  It was supposed that the noisy fellow
would slink away to some cave in his native mountains, and never
show his brazen face among honest people again.  But the impudence
of "Hon." John Whimpery Brass rose to the level of the emergency.
Instead of hiding or hanging himself, he published a card
representing that he embarked in the scheme for the purpose of
entrapping Wogan & Co. and bringing them to justice.

Pathetic was the spectacle, showing the confidence of an ingenuous
soul in its own prowess, of the volunteer detective, digging
parallels on the southern spurs of the Blue Ridge for the capture
of the wily swindler a thousand miles away!  Armed with a kernel of
corn, the doughty gosling sets forth to catch the wicked fox that
is preying on the flock!  If the bold mountaineers, the
constituency of "Hon." John Whimpery Brass, cannot commend the
discretion displayed by the projector of the enterprise, they must
certainly admire his pluck.  In face of the odds, few goslings
would volunteer.

Perhaps the card might have been accepted by the more trustful
class of adherents as a satisfactory explanation of the letters,
had not the aspiring statesman in course of time fallen under the
ban of the law for defrauding widows of their pensions, the
campaign against Wogan & Co. having so completely exhausted the
virtue of the amateur who planned it as to leave no residue to
fructify in subsequent operations.



THE FORTUNE OF SETH SAVAGE


At one time the bogus-lottery men drove a thrifty business, but the
efforts, virtually co-operative, of the post-office department and
of the legislatures of the older states, have latterly pretty
effectually forced them into the wilderness.  The managers forage
on the same class of people as the sawdust swindlers, procuring
lists of names in the same way.  A common method of procedure is to
inclose with advertisements announcing the prizes, together with
the place and date of drawing, one or more tickets duly numbered.
Great confidence is expressed in the personal fitness of the party
addressed, who is requested to act as agent for the sale of the
tickets.  A few weeks later another letter is sent to the intended
victim, informing him that the ticket of a given number forwarded
to him at such a date had drawn a prize, the value of which is
variously stated from a few hundred to many thousand dollars.  He
is then requested to send immediately ten dollars--more or less--
for the ticket, perhaps ten or twenty more for additional charges,
when the full face value of the prize will be forwarded promptly by
express, check on New York, or in any other way the recipient may
direct.  He is also told to antedate the letter, the intermediary
promising to blur the postmark to correspond, so that the
remittance may appear to have been made prior to the drawing.  In
conclusion the writer adroitly suggests that he desires the
fortunate man to exhibit the money to his neighbors, stating how he
obtained it, and mentioning particularly the address of the agent
from whom the ticket was purchased, the object being to create an
excitement in the place with a view to large sales for the next
drawing.

Even of a trick as transparent as this the victims are counted by
thousands, exposures and warnings being alike disregarded.  The
infatuation of a certain class of ignorant and credulous people is
well illustrated by the case of Seth Savage, a poor man possessed
of a few acres in the vicinity of a small village in Vermont.  One
day, when a special agent of wide experience happened to be
visiting the post-office, Seth received a letter, the perusal of
which threw him into a frenzy of excitement.

"What is the matter?" inquired the postmaster.  "You seem to have
good news."

"Look a-here," replied Seth, holding forth the missive in his
shriveled and bony fingers, "for nigh on to sixty-five year, Mr.
Martin, I've fit and work'd and work'd and fit jest for my vittles
and drink.  Neow when I'm tew old tew 'joy it, a fortin comes to
me."

"Is that so?" answered Mr. Martin.  "I am very glad; but tell me,
what is it?  Your neighbors will all be glad to hear of your good
luck."

"Read that," said Seth, handing him the letter triumphantly.

The postmaster read the manuscript.  One Dewitt of New York City
assured Mr. Savage that a certain ticket sent to him a month before
had drawn a prize of three thousand dollars; that on receipt of
thirty-five dollars in a letter antedated according to directions,
the full amount would be forwarded to him.

"Surely, Seth," expostulated the postmaster, "you are not going to
be fooled in this way.  Dewitt is a humbug, a swindler."

"Neow, heow dew yeou know that?" inquired Seth.  "Has he ever
fool'd yeou?"

"I don't deal with that sort of people," replied Mr. Martin mildly.
"I dislike to see anyone wronged, especially a neighbor.  Here is a
gentleman who knows all about such matters."  And Seth was formally
introduced to the special agent, who took pains to explain the
character of the swindle fully.

The officer left the village with the pleasant assurance that his
brief visit had contributed at least toward the rescue of one poor
object from the jaws of the devourer.

After all, however, Seth was not convinced.  By selling his only
cow he managed to swell his scanty stock of cash to the requisite
sum, which he sent to Dewitt, fully expecting to be able in a few
days to confound the postmaster by the actual display of his newly
gotten wealth.  The dupe, who had invested a goodly portion of his
scanty means in the venture, waited long if not patiently.  At
length, after the expiration of the last hope, Mr. Martin inquired,
"How did it happen, Seth, that you threw away your money on that
lottery scamp, when we showed you that the whole thing was a
cheat?"

"Wall, neow, arter it's all lost," replied Seth, "I'll tell yeou
jest heow 'twas.  Human natur' is naturally suspectin'.  I tho't
yeou and that ar' t'other postoffis fellah want'd to git the prize
for yeourselfs; an' I didn't mean to be beat so."



A WISH UNEXPECTEDLY GRATIFIED


When the bogus-lottery men were driven out of the large cities by
the vigor of the postal authorities, they tried for a while to
operate from small country towns by collusion with dishonest
postmasters.  As the delinquencies of the offenders were
successively brought to light, their heads rolled into the basket
at the foot of the official guillotine.  The swindlers, however,
succeeded in bribing fresh victims, and for a time cunning and
duplicity managed with tolerable success to maintain a foothold
against the power of the department.

Among other similar swindles, sealed circulars were at one time
scattered broadcast over the more remote states, announcing that on
a given date the drawing for a series of magnificent prizes would
take place at Livingston Hall, No. 42 Elm Avenue, Wington Junction,
Connecticut.  Patrons were urged to remit the purchase-money for
tickets promptly, as there would be no postponement of the grand
event under any circumstances.  "Fortune," continued the glittering
advertisement, "knocks once at every one's door, and she is now
knocking at yours."

As usual, multitudes swallowed the bait, but some, instead of
sending the greenbacks to Highfalutin & Co., forwarded the
circulars to the department.  Thereupon special agent Sharretts was
instructed to visit Wington Junction, with the view of learning
whether the postmaster was properly discharging his duties.  Taking
an early opportunity to perform the mission, he alighted at the
station one morning, and proceeded to survey the town, which
consisted of four or five houses scattered along the highway for a
distance of half a mile.  "Livingston Hall" and "Elm Avenue" were
nowhere visible.  It was apparent that "No. 42" on any avenue was a
remote contingency not likely to arise in the present generation.

Having previously ascertained that the postmaster was also switch-
tender at the junction, and that the cares of the office devolved
on his wife, the officer walked up to a keen-looking man in front
of the little round switch-house, whose energies were devoted
exclusively at that moment to the mastication of a huge quid of
tobacco, and who, after a prolonged scrutiny of the stranger,
answered his salutation in an attenuated drawl,' "Meornin', sir."

"Will you be kind enough to tell me, sir, where Mr. Morris, the
postmaster, can be found?" asked the agent.

"Wall, I guess my name's Morris.  What kin I do fur yeou?"

"Mr. Morris, I should like a few minutes' private conversation on
business of great importance, which can be so managed as to turn
out advantageously to us both.  I do not wish to be overheard or
interrupted.  In these times even blank walls have ears, you know."

The last suggestion seemed to serve as a passport to the confidence
of the postmaster.  Leading the way into the switch-house, he
remarked, "Come in heear.  Neow, what is it?"

"The fact is, Mr. Morris, some friends of mine propose to go into a
little speculation, which will involve a large correspondence; and
for reasons that I need not specify to a man like you, they do not
wish to have every ragtag, bobtail post-office clerk poring over
their letters, and asking impertinent questions at the delivery-
window.  If they can find a shrewd, square man, who knows how to
keep his mouth shut, and who can't be fooled, that for a handsome
consideration will put the letters away in a safe place till called
for, they are willing to make an arrangement that will be
profitable all around.  You have been recommended as just the
person.  I am told that you generally know which side your bread is
buttered, and have called to see if we can't arrange to pull
together."

"'Nuff said," ejaculated Morris, with a sly wink.  "I know what
yeou want, but my wife is the one to fix things.  I don't have
nuthin' to dew with the letters.  Sue 'tends to everything.  The
folks as we'se a-workin' for said we must be plaguey keerful about
the deetecters.  I'll bet nun on 'em can't play it on my wife tho'.
If they dew, they'll have to git up arly in the mornin'."

With that he thrust his head out of the window, and yelled: "Sue,
Sue!"

As the sound died away, a tall, raw-boned female, from whose cheeks
the bloom of youth had faded a number of years before, emerged from
the side door of a two-story cottage, about eighty rods distant,
and walked briskly to the switch-house, where she was introduced to
the stranger as "my wife."

After a little preliminary skirmishing, she invited the agent to go
over to the cottage.  Having been duly ushered into the "best
room," he embellished for her benefit the story already told to the
husband.

"I think I kin 'commodate yeou," she broke forth, "but yeou'll have
to pay putty well for't.  Laws me, I'm told--and I've ways o'
heerin' 'bout these things--that the deetecters are jest as likely
as not to come a-swoopin' deown enny minnit.  Yeou know, if they
feound it out, we'd be smash'd."

Her terms were ten dollars a week.  Highfalutin & Co. paid six, but
she understood the business a great deal better now than when she
made the bargain with them.  The agent thought the price rather
high, but finally consented to contract at that figure.

Then, as if troubled by an after-thought, he said, "Madam, how do I
know but some of these 'deetecters' may come around, and, seeing my
letters, get me into difficulty?"

"Why, laws a' mercy," said she, "don't be skeer'd.  Yeou jest leave
that to me.  The minnit them air letters gits here, I hides 'em in
that bewro-draw'r," pointing to an article of furniture in the
corner.

"Is it a safe place?" queried the agent.

"Yas, it is," answered the woman.  "Got it half full neow.  Carry
the key in my pocket."

She gave a grin, intended for a knowing smile, in admiration of her
own cleverness.

"I believe the hiding-place is tolerably secure," replied the
officer, with the air of one who desired to be convinced, but had
not yet reached the point of full assurance.

"You seem to be very particl'r and diffikilt to satisfy," continued
Mrs. Morris; "but, if yeou don't believe it, jest come and see for
you'sef."

She led the way to the bureau, opened the drawer, and, raising a
plaid cotton handkerchief, displayed the contraband letters by the
score.  All were directed to the lottery firm, and were turned over
to the knave from time to time as it suited his convenience to call
for them.  As no such firm did business at Wington Junction, it was
the duty of the postmaster to forward to the department, as
fictitious and undeliverable, all letters bearing the address of
the swindlers.  In similar cases neglect to obey the regulation was
treated as sufficient ground for instant removal.

More fully pleased with the result of the examination than the
woman surmised, the officer resumed: "I see you are very particular
about your methods of doing business, and do not mean to be caught
napping.  The arrangement we are about to enter into is a very
important one, and, as you are not postmaster, your husband will
have to be present to witness and ratify the bargain."

"Bless yeour soul," replied she, "it's all right.  I 'tend to all
the biznis.  My husband doesn't bother hissef abeout it in the
least."

"Madam," answered the officer, "pardon me.  I had my training in a
large city, and am accustomed to pay minute attention to every
detail.  Your husband is the principal in this case, and must
ratify the agreement to make it binding.  Of course you will derive
all the benefit, but his presence is essential as a matter of
form."

Apparently satisfied, she called for "John," who replied promptly
to the summons.

"Mr. Morris," said the officer, "your wife has agreed to keep my
letters for me--"

"Yaas," broke in the postmaster.  "I know'd she would.  Yeou'll
find she'll dew it right, tew.  Nobody can't come enny tricks on
her--can they, Sue?  I wish one o' 'em durn'd deetecters would come
around, jest tew see heow she'd pull the wool over 'im.  I wudn't
ax enny better fun;" and he indulged in a fit of loud cachinnation
at the absurdity of supposing that anyone could match in sharpness
his own beloved Sue.

"The letters will come to that address," said the agent, pulling
out his commission from the postmaster-general, and exhibiting it
to the pair.

Taking in the purport of it at a glance, Morris jumped several
inches into the air, slapped his sides, and exclaimed, "A
deetecter, arter all; sold, by jingo!"

"We're bust'd then," chimed in Sue, with a melancholy grin.

It was even so.  The letters for Highfalutin & Co. went to
Washington, and Morris went out of the post-office; but the fact
that Sue was overmatched hurt him more than the loss of the place.


June 8, 1872, a law was approved making it a penal offense to use
the mails for the purpose of defrauding others, whether residing
within or outside of the United States.  The postmaster-general was
also authorized to forbid the payment of postal money orders to
persons engaged in fraudulent lotteries, gift enterprises, and
other schemes for swindling the public, and to instruct postmasters
to return to the writers, with the word "fraudulent" written or
stamped on the outside, all registered letters directed to such
persons or firms.  Prior to the enactment of this law, the most
wholesale and barefaced operations were conducted by professional
cheats, mainly through the facilities afforded by the mails, with
almost absolute impunity.  Letters addressed to bogus firms were
indeed forwarded from the offices of delivery to the department as
"fictitious" and "undeliverable," and many colluding postmasters
were decapitated.  Such petty measures of warfare served merely to
annoy the vampires and to whet their diabolical ingenuity for the
contrivance of new devices.  Since the law of 1872 went into
effect, however, the scoundrels have been compelled to travel a
thorny road.  Scores of arrests have been made, and in many cases
the criminals have been sentenced to the penitentiary.

It would exceed our limits even to enumerate the devices which have
been tried by different swindlers with greater or less success.
Gift enterprises of various kinds are the most common and
notorious, constituting a distinct branch of the business; but the
pretenses on which human credulity is invited to part with actual
cash for imaginary benefits are innumerable.  A few specimens are
given as illustrations.



AN OLD GAME REVIVED


On the 18th of September, 1875, a fellow was arrested in West
Virginia who sent the victims whom he proposed to bleed letters
whereof the following is a copy:--


"A lady who boarded with me died on last Saturday of apoplexy.  She
left a trunk containing the following property:  One very fine
ladies' gold watch and chain, one ladies' gold necklace, six
ladies' finger rings, earrings, and a great deal of ladies'
clothing.  Among other things was a letter addressed to you.  I
suppose you to be a relative of the deceased, and want to send you
the trunk.  When Miss Thompson died she left a board bill unpaid
amounting to $20.50.  You will please send this amount by return
mail, and the trunk will be forwarded to you immediately."


Instead of remitting the money as modestly requested, the recipient
of one of these choice douceurs, a lady residing in the interior of
Pennsylvania, sent the letter to the mayor of the town where it was
dated and postmarked, who in turn handed it over to special agent
T. P. Shallcross; and he in the course of a day or two succeeded in
capturing the miscreant.

This particular form of the confidence game is very old; yet in the
year of our Lord eighteen hundred and seventy-five a swindler by
means of it succeeds not only in maintaining himself in dashing
style, but also in sporting a flashy traveling companion of the
female persuasion!

Where the letters are addressed to men, the articles reported to be
found in the imaginary trunk are changed to correspond to masculine
habits and wants.  The operators receive many singular and some
entertaining replies.  The following, dated long ago from a small
town at the South, may serve as a sample, the orthography of the
original being preserved:--


"COL. SNOWDEN,

"Dear Sir,--Yours received, and you say John is dead.  Poor fellow!
I always expected it.  Death runs in the family.  Dyed suddenly of
appleplexy--eat too many apples.  Well, I always thought John would
hurt himself eating apples.  I s'pose you had him buried.  You said
nothing about funeral expenses.  He had a trunk--gold watch in it,
&c.  Well, well, what an unexpected legacy! but strange things
happen sometimes.  Never thought I should get a gold watch so.  And
he had the watch in his trunk, did he?  Poor fellow! was always so
particular 'bout his watch and fixings.  Had two revolvers.  What
is them?  I never heard John say anything about them.  Well, you
have been so kind as to write to me; just keep all the balance of
the things, you can have them; but the gold watch, send that to me
by express.  Send immediately if not sooner."

"Very truly,

"GEO. STREAM.

"P. S.  My mother in law says, if you come this way, call.  She
likes to know all such good, kind folks."


It is safe to conclude that "Col. Snowden" never accepted the
invitation to call from the hospitable mother-in-law.



A FORMIDABLE WEAPON


In the summer and fall of 1875 circulars were scattered broadcast
over the country, and advertisements appeared in the weekly
editions of several leading papers of New York City and other large
towns, setting forth the rare merits of a weapon of destruction
called "Allan's New Low-Priced Seven-Shooter."  As a specimen of
ingenious description, the more salient parts of the circular are
herewith reproduced:--


"In introducing this triumph of mechanical genius to the American
public, it is proper to say that it is not an entirely new article,
but that it has lately been improved in appearance, simplicity of
construction, and accuracy, having new points of excellence, making
it superior in many respects to those first made.  The
manufacturers having improved facilities for making them cheaply
and rapidly, have reduced the price to one dollar and fifty cents;
and while the profits on a single one are necessarily small, this
price places them within the reach of all.

"We wish it distinctly understood that this is no cheap, good-for-
nothing 'pop-gun'; and while none can expect it to be 'silver-
mounted' for $1.50, they have a right to expect the worth of their
money, and in this new improved seven-shooter a want is supplied.

"Great care is taken in the adjustment of EACH, so that ALL are
equally good and reliable.  In their production no trouble or
expense has been spared.  An elaborate and complete set of
machinery and gauges has been made, by means of which all the parts
are produced exactly alike, thus insuring great uniformity in the
character of the work produced."


This remarkable implement, equally useful for peace or war, is
offered to an eager public at the low price of $1.50 each, or $13
per dozen.  On the score of cheapness, the inventor greatly prefers
the mails to the express as a vehicle for the transport of his
wares.  In fact, he declines to patronize the express companies at
all, unless a prepayment of twenty-five per cent, accompanies each
order as a guaranty of the "purchaser's good faith."

At first the enterprise succeeded even beyond the most sanguine
expectations of its projector, letters with the cash inclosed
pouring in by the hundred.  For several months, however, after the
first publication of the advertisement, "this triumph of mechanical
genius," though "not an entirely new article," existed only in the
comprehensive brain of the gentleman who had the greatness to
discern in the imperfect work of predecessors the germs of ideal
perfection.  Having no seven-shooters to send, he was compelled to
dishonor the requisitions of the expectant "traveler, sailor,
hunter, fisherman, etc."  While careful to lay aside the
inclosures, he entirely forgot even to so far remember his patrons
as to make a record of their names.

In due time, however, the "factory" went into operation, and the
seven-shooters were actually produced.  The mechanical "triumph,"
rudely made of a cheap metal composition, is a duplicate of a toy
long used by boys to the delight of each other, and to the
annoyance of their elders.  The propulsive power resides in a steel
spring, which has force enough to send a bird-shot across a good-
sized room.  The outfit would cost perhaps six or eight cents to
the manufacturer.  A portion of the orders were now filled, the
greater part being still thrown unhonored into the waste-basket as
before.

Curses both loud and deep began to be showered on the head of the
swindler.  Complaints having reached the department, special agent
C. E. Henry started to hunt for "Wilcox & Co.," of Windsor, Ohio,
for such was the direction in the advertisements and on the
circular.  Proceeding several miles from the nearest railroad, he
found the rural settlement where the factory was supposed to be
located.

Guided by various inquiries, he finally drove up to the small farm-
house where the parents of Wilcox & Co. resided.  On entering, the
officer said, "I am in search of Mr. Wilcox, of the firm of Wilcox
& Co."

"I am your man," remarked a youth, perhaps twenty-two years of age,
whose countenance at once suggested acuteness and cunning.  "What
will you have?"

"I would like to take a look about the arsenal and gun-factory
located here," replied the detective, leisurely surveying the
landscape.

"The works are in Cleveland," answered the great inventor.  "You
can see them by calling there."

"But where is the arsenal?  I understand it was situated here."

"Your information is correct," replied the young man.  "That is it,
across the road."

Casting his eye in the direction indicated, the officer saw a
rickety woodshed about seven feet by nine in size.

Observing the smile of amused incredulity that played upon the
features of his questioner, Wilcox reiterated, with an air of half
offended dignity,--

"That's it.  We keep our seven-shooters there.  But look here;
before this thing goes any further, I want to know who you are."

"Oh, certainly, sir," answered the stranger.  "You will find
nothing about me that I care to keep concealed.  I am a special
agent of the post-office department, and my business here is to
arrest you."

"Why, what have I done to warrant such a visit?" queried youthful
innocence.

"I shall be happy to make that point clear to you," replied the
detective, "though I am afraid the enlightenment will come too late
to prove of much service to you.  In using the mails for the
purpose of swindling, you have violated the laws of the country,
and must suffer the penalty."

"But where does the swindling come in?" expostulated Wilcox.  "I
advertised a seven-shooter.  I didn't say anything about a
revolver.  It will shoot seven shot, or twice that number, if you
only put them in.  If anybody is green enough to suppose I meant a
revolver, that's his lookout, not mine."

"We are not called upon to decide the point," said the special
agent.  "The question is one for the court and the jury.  But you
must go with me to Cleveland.  So get ready."

Finding persuasion, argument, and remonstrance alike useless, the
great mechanical genius packed his satchel in preparation for the
journey.  Once fairly on the road, he became communicative, and
explained the reasons which led him to embark in the enterprise.
"In the first place," said he, "I read Barnum's Life, and accepted
the doctrine that the American people like to be humbugged.  I
planned the shooter myself, and, in wording the circular, aimed to
cover the points and keep within the law.  I think I have
succeeded."

"I beg leave to differ," argued the special agent.  "Aside from the
general falsity of the description, there are specific claims which
you cannot make good."

"I don't see the matter in that light," replied the champion of the
seven-shooter.  "I say, 'Wherever introduced, they advertise
themselves.'  Well, don't they?  Whoever gets one will be apt to
tell his neighbors.  Isn't that advertising itself?  I also say,
'The sale of one opens the market for a dozen in any neighborhood;'
but observe, I don't claim that any more will be sold in that
neighborhood, even if the market is opened.  So far as my guaranty
is concerned, I only warrant them to be as good after three years'
use as when first purchased.  Will you, or will any court, call
that in question?"

"It is charged," said the officer, changing the subject, "that you
neglected to fill a good many orders.  How do you explain that?"

"Why, to furnish the shooter and pay the postage cuts down the
profits terribly," was the unique and characteristic reply.

Orders began to arrive in response to the circular nearly five
months before the first shooter came from the hands of the
manufacturer; and as none of them were ever filled, or even
recorded, it is impossible to estimate how many dupes long watched
the mails in anxious expectancy, and perhaps attributed their
disappointment to dishonesty among the employees of the department.

Of course the papers which printed the advertisement would have
spurned the impostor and exposed the fraud, had they discovered the
facts.  The most scrupulous and careful publishers are often
deceived in the character of advertisements that come through the
regular channels of business, and appear plausible on their face.
In fact, the religious journals are the favorite vehicles of the
swindlers.  The solicitude felt by the newspapers, not only for
their own reputation, but for the interests of their patrons, was
illustrated in the correspondence found on the person of Wilcox.
An influential western journal had addressed him two notes which
ran thus:--


GENTS:  We receive frequent letters from subscribers, saying they
receive no answers to letters they send you containing money for
'7-Shooters.'  How is it?  Are you swindlers?"


Wilcox, though fully able to answer the conundrum, did not see fit
to do so; and hence, on the 3d of November, the same parties
deployed their forces to renew the charge.


"--, Nov. 3, 1875.

"WILCOX & CO.:

"We have written you once before, that our patrons complain to us
that you do not fill their cash orders, and will not answer their
letters of inquiry as to why you don't.  We have received so many
such that we suspect there is something wrong, and, unless you
explain satisfactorily, we will have to expose you."


As the special agent arrived on the same day with the inquiry, the
young man had no opportunity to make the desired explanation.
Indeed it is doubtful if one so modest and reticent on matters of
personal merit, would have answered the question even if permitted
to take all winter to do it in.

The United States commissioner, while fully recognizing the
ingenuity of the circular, differed somewhat from its author in
interpreting its legal construction, and accordingly placed him
under a bond of fifteen hundred dollars to appear for trial.



Andrew Lang


Saint-Germain the Deathless


Among the best brief masterpieces of fiction are Lytton's The
Haunters and the Haunted, and Thackeray's Notch on the Axe in
Roundabout Papers.*  Both deal with a mysterious being who passes
through the ages, rich, powerful, always behind the scenes, coming
no man knows whence, and dying, or pretending to die, obscurely--
you never find authentic evidence of his disease.  In other later
times, at other courts, such an one reappears and runs the same
course of luxury, marvel, and hidden potency.


* Both given in the accompanying volume containing "Old Time
English" Stories.  See also the first story in the "North Europe"
volume.--Editor.


Lytton returned to and elaborated his idea in the Margrave of A
Strange Story, who has no "soul," and prolongs his physical and
intellectual life by means of an elixir.  Margrave is not bad, but
he is inferior to the hero, less elaborately designed, of The
Haunters and the Haunted.  Thackeray's tale is written in a tone of
mock mysticism, but he confesses that he likes his own story, in
which the strange hero through all his many lives or reappearances,
and through all the countless loves on which he fatuously plumes
himself, retains a slight German-Jewish accent.

It appears to me that the historic original of these romantic
characters is no other than the mysterious Comte de Saint-Germain--
not, of course, the contemporary and normal French soldier and
minister, of 1707-1778, who bore the same name.  I have found the
name, with dim allusions, in the unpublished letters and MSS. of
Prince Charles Edward Stuart, and have not always been certain
whether the reference was to the man of action or to the man of
mystery.  On the secret of the latter, the deathless one, I have no
new light to throw, and only speak of him for a single reason.
Aristotle assures us, in his Poetics, that the best-known myths
dramatized on the Athenian stage were known to very few of the
Athenian audience.  It is not impossible that the story of Saint-
Germain, though it seems as familiar as the myth of Oedipus or
Thyestes, may, after all, not be vividly present to the memory of
every reader.  The omniscent Larousse, of the Dictionnaire
Universel, certainly did not know one very accessible fact about
Saint-Germain, nor have I seen it mentioned in other versions of
his legend.  We read, in Larousse, "Saint-Germain is not heard of
in France before 1750, when he established himself in Paris.  No
adventure had called attention to his existence; it was only known
that he had moved about Europe, lived in Italy, Holland, and in
England, and had borne the names of Marquis de Monteferrat, and of
Comte de Bellamye, which he used at Venice."

Lascelles Wraxall, again, in Remarkable Adventures (1863), says:
"Whatever truth there may be in Saint-Germain's travels in England
and the East Indies, it is undubitable that, for from 1745 to 1755,
he was a man of high position in Vienna," while in Paris he does
not appear, according to Wraxall, till 1757, having been brought
from Germany by the Marechal de Belle-Isle, whose "old boots," says
Macallester the spy, Prince Charles freely damned, "because they
were always stuffed with projects."  Now we hear of Saint-Germain,
by that name, as resident, not in Vienna, but in London, at the
very moment when Prince Charles, evading Cumberland, who lay with
his army at Stone, in Staffordshire, marched to Derby.  Horace
Walpole writes to Mann in Florence (December 9, 1745):

"We begin to take up people . . . the other day they seized an odd
man who goes by the name of Count Saint-Germain.  He has been here
these two years, and will not tell who he is, or whence, but
professes that he does not go by his right name.  He sings, plays
on the violin wonderfully, composes, is mad, and not very sensible.
He is called an Italian, a Spaniard, a Pole; a somebody that
married a great fortune in Mexico, and ran away with her jewels to
Constantinople; a priest, a fiddler, a vast nobleman.  The Prince
of Wales has had unsatiated curiosity about him, but in vain.
However, nothing has been made out against him; he is released,
and, what convinces me he is not a gentleman, stays here, and talks
of his being taken up for a spy."

Here is our earliest authentic note on Saint-Germain; a note
omitted by his French students.  He was in London from 1743 to
1745, under a name not his own, but that which he later bore at the
Court of France.  From the allusion to his jewels (those of a
deserted Mexican bride), it appears that he was already as rich in
these treasures as he was afterwards, when his French acquaintances
marveled at them.  (As to his being "mad," Walpole may refer to
Saint-Germain's way of talking as if he had lived in remote ages,
and known famous people of the past).

Having caught this daylight glimpse of Saint-Germain in Walpole,
having learned that in December, 1745, he was arrested and examined
as a possible Jacobite agent, we naturally expect to find our
contemporary official documents about his examination by the
Government.  Scores of such records exist, containing the questions
put to, and the answers given by, suspected persons.  But we vainly
hunt through the Newcastle MSS., and the State Papers, Domestic, in
the Record Office, for a trace of the examination of Saint-Germain.
I am not aware that he was anywhere left his trail in official
documents; he lives in more or less legendary memoirs, alone.

At what precise date Saint-Germain became an intimate of Louis XV.,
the Duc de Choiseul, Madame de Pompadour, and the Marechal de
Belle-Isle, one cannot ascertain.  The writers of memoirs are the
vaguest of mortals about dates; only one discerns that Saint-
Germain was much about the French Court, and high in the favor of
the King, having rooms at Chambord, during the Seven Years' War,
and just before the time of the peace negotiations of 1762-1763.
The art of compiling false or forged memoirs of that period was
widely practiced; but the memoirs of Madame du Hausset, who speaks
of Saint-Germain, are authentic.  She was the widow of a poor man
of noble family, and was one of two femmes de chambre of Madame de
Pompadour.  Her manuscript was written, she explains, by aid of a
brief diary which she kept during her term of service.  One day M.
Senac de Meilhan found Madame de Pompadour's brother, M. de
Marigny, about to burn a packet of papers.  "It is the journal," he
said, "of a femme de chambre of my sister, a good, kind woman."  De
Meilhan asked for the manuscript, which he later gave to Mr.
Crawford, one of the Kilwinning family, in Ayrshire, who later
helped in the escape of Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette to
Varennes, where they were captured.  With the journal of Madame du
Hausset were several letters to Marigny on points of historical
anecdote.[1]


[1] One of these gives Madame de Vieux-Maison as the author of a
roman a clef, Secret Memoirs of the Court of Persia, which contains
an early reference to the Man in the Iron Mask (died 1703).  The
letter-writer avers that D'Argenson, the famous minister of Louis
XV., said that the Man in the Iron Mask was really a person fort
peu de chose, 'of very little account,' and that the Regent
d'Orleans was of the same opinion.  This corroborates my theory,
that the Mask was merely the valet of a Huguenot conspirator, Roux
de Marsilly, captured in England, and imprisoned because he was
supposed to know some terrible secret--which he knew nothing about.
See The Valet's Tragedy, Longmans, 1903.


Crawford published the manuscript of Madame du Hausset, which he
was given by de Meilhan, and the memoirs are thus from an authentic
source.  The author says that Louis XV. was always kind to her, but
spoke little to her, whereas Madame de Pompadour remarked, "The
King and I trust you so much that we treat you like a cat or a dog,
and talk freely before you."

As to Saint-Germain, Madame du Hausset writes: "A man who was as
amazing as a witch came often to see Madame de Pompadour.  This was
the Comte de Saint-Germain, who wished to make people believe that
he had lived for several centuries.  One day Madame said to him,
while at her toilet, "What sort of man was Francis I., a king whom
I could have loved?"  "A good sort of fellow," said Saint-Germain;
"too fiery--I could have given him a useful piece of advice, but he
would not have listened."  He then described, in very general
terms, the beauty of Mary Stuart and La Reine Margot.  "You seem to
have seen them all," said Madame de Pompadour, laughing.
"Sometimes," said Saint-Germain, "I amuse myself, not by making
people believe, but by letting them believe, that I have lived from
time immemorial."  "But you do not tell us your age, and you give
yourself out as very old.  Madame de Gergy, who was wife of the
French ambassador at Venice fifty years ago, I think, says that she
knew you there, and that you are not changed in the least."  "It is
true, Madame, that I knew Madame de Gergy long ago."  "But
according to her story you must now be over a century old."  "It
may be so, but I admit that even more possibly the respected lady
is in her dotage."

At this time Saint-Germain, says Madame du Hausset, looked about
fifty, was neither thin nor stout, seemed clever, and dressed
simply, as a rule, but in good taste.  Say that the date was 1760,
Saint-Germain looked fifty; but he had looked the same age,
according to Madame de Gergy, at Venice, fifty years earlier, in
1710.  We see how pleasantly he left Madame de Pompadour in doubt
on that point.

He pretended to have the secret of removing flaws from diamonds.
The King showed him a stone valued at 6,000 francs--without a flaw
it would have been worth 10,000.  Saint-Germain said that he could
remove the flaw in a month, and in a month he brought back the
diamond--flawless.  The King sent it, without any comment, to his
jeweler, who gave 9,600 francs for the stone, but the King returned
the money, and kept the gem as a curiosity.  Probably it was not
the original stone, but another cut in the same fashion, Saint-
Germain sacrificing 3,000 or 4,000 francs to his practical joke.
He also said that he could increase the size of pearls, which he
could have proved very easily--in the same manner.  He would not
oblige Madame de Pompadour by giving the King an elixir of life: "I
should be mad if I gave the King a drug."  There seems to be a
reference to this desire of Madame de Pompadour in an unlikely
place, a letter of Pickle the Spy to Mr. Vaughan (1754)!  This
conversation Madame du Hausset wrote down on the day of its
occurrence.

Both Louis XV. and Madame de Pompadour treated Saint-Germain as a
person of consequence.  "He is a quack, for he says he has an
elixir," said Dr. Quesnay, with medical skepticism.  "Moreover, our
master, the King, is obstinate; he sometimes speaks of Saint-
Germain as a person of illustrious birth."

The age was skeptical, unscientific, and, by reaction, credulous.
The philosophes, Hume, Voltaire, and others, were exposing, like an
ingenious American gentleman, "the mistakes of Moses."  The Earl of
Marischal told Hume that life had been chemically produced in a
laboratory, so what becomes of Creation?  Prince Charles, hidden in
a convent, was being tutored by Mlle. Luci in the sensational
philosophy of Locke, "nothing in the intellect which does not come
through the senses"--a queer theme for a man of the sword to study.
But, thirty years earlier, the Regent d'Orleans had made crystal-
gazing fashionable, and stories of ghosts and second-sight in the
highest circles were popular.  Mesmer had not yet appeared, to give
a fresh start to the old savage practice of hypnotism; Cagliostro
was not yet on the scene with his free-masonry of the ancient
Egyptian school.  But people were already in extremes of doubt and
of belief; there might be something in the elixir of life and in
the philosopher's stone; it might be possible to make precious
stones chemically, and Saint-Germain, who seemed to be over a
century old at least, might have all these secrets.

Whence came his wealth in precious stones, people asked, unless
from some mysterious knowledge, or some equally mysterious and
illustrious birth?

He showed Madame de Pompadour a little box full of rubies, topazes,
and diamonds.  Madame de Pompadour called Madame du Hausset to look
at them; she was dazzled, but skeptical, and made a sign to show
that she thought them paste.  The Count then exhibited a superb
ruby, tossing aside contemptuously a cross covered with gems.
"That is not so contemptible," said Madame du Hausset, hanging it
round her neck.  The Count begged her to keep the jewel; she
refused, and Madame de Pompadour backed her refusal.  But Saint-
Germain insisted, and Madame de Pompadour, thinking that the cross
might be worth forty louis, made a sign to Madame du Hausset that
she accept.  She did, and the jewel was valued at 1,500 francs--
which hardly proves that the other large jewels were genuine,
though Von Gleichen believed they were, and thought the Count's
cabinet of old masters very valuable.

The fingers, the watch, the snuffbox, the shoe-buckles, the garter
studs, the solitaires of the Count, on high days, all burned with
diamonds and rubies, which were estimated, one day, at 200,000
francs.  His wealth did not come from cards or swindling--no such
charges are ever hinted at; he did not sell elixirs, nor
prophecies, nor initiations.  His habits do not seem to have been
extravagant.  One might regard him as a clever eccentric person,
the unacknowledged child, perhaps, of some noble, who had put his
capital mainly into precious stones.  But Louis XV. treated him as
a serious personage, and probably knew, or thought he knew, the
secret of his birth.  People held that he was a bastard of a king
of Portugal, says Madame du Hausset.  Perhaps the most ingenious
and plausible theory of the birth of Saint-Germain makes him the
natural son, not of a king of Portugal, but of a queen of Spain.
The evidence is not evidence, but a series of surmises.  Saint-
Germain, on this theory, 'wrop his buth up in a mistry' (like that
of Charles James Fitzjames de la Pluche), out of regard for the
character of his royal mamma.  I believe this about as much as I
believe that a certain Rev. Mr. Douglas, an obstreperous
Covenanting minister, was a descendant of the captive Mary Stuart.
However, Saint-Germain is said, like Kaspar Hauser, to have
murmured of dim memories of his infancy, of diversions on
magnificent terraces, and of palaces glowing beneath an azure sky.
This is reported by Von Gleichen, who knew him very well, but
thought him rather a quack.  Possibly he meant to convey the idea
that he was Moses, and that he had dwelt in the palaces of the
Ramessids.  The grave of the prophet was never known, and Saint-
Germain may have insinuated that he began a new avatar in a cleft
of Mount Pisgah; he was capable of it.

However, a less wild surmise avers that, in 1763, the secrets of
his birth and the source of his opulence were known in Holland.
The authority is the Memoirs of Grosley (1813).  Grosley was an
archaeologist of Troyes; he had traveled in Italy, and written an
account of his travels; he also visited Holland and England, and
later, from a Dutchman, he picked up his information about Saint-
Germain.  Grosley was a Fellow of our Royal Society, and I greatly
revere the authority of a F.R.S.  His later years were occupied in
the compilation of his Memoirs, including an account of what he did
and heard in Holland, and he died in 1785.  According to Grosley's
account of what the Dutchman knew, Saint-Germain was the son of a
princess who fled (obviously from Spain) to Bayonne, and of a
Portuguese Jew dwelling in Bordeaux.

What fairy and fugitive princess can this be, whom not in vain the
ardent Hebrew wooed?  She was, she must have been, as Grosley saw,
the heroine of Victor Hugo's Ruy Blas.  The unhappy Charles II. of
Spain, a kind of "mammet" (as the English called the Richard II.
who appeared up in Islay, having escaped from Pomfret Castle), had
for his first wife a daughter of Henrietta, the favorite sister of
our Charles II.  This childless bride, after some ghostly years of
matrimony, after being exorcised in disgusting circumstances, died
in February, 1689.  In May, 1690 a new bride, Marie de Neuborg, was
brought to the grisly side of the crowned mammet of Spain.  She,
too, failed to prevent the wars of the Spanish Succession by giving
an heir to the Crown of Spain.  Scandalous chronicles aver that
Marie was chosen as Queen of Spain for the levity of her character,
and that the Crown was expected, as in the Pictish monarchy, to
descend on the female side; the father of the prince might be
anybody.  What was needed was simply a son of the QUEEN of Spain.
She had, while Queen, no son, as far as is ascertained, but she had
a favorite, a Count Andanero, whom she made minister of finance.
"He was not a born Count," he was a financier, this favorite of the
Queen of Spain.  That lady did go to live in Bayonne in 1706, six
years after the death of Charles II., her husband.  The hypothesis
is, then, that Saint-Germain was the son of this ex-Queen of Spain,
and of the financial Count, Andanero, a man, "not born in the
sphere of Counts," and easily transformed by tradition into a
Jewish banker of Bordeaux.  The Duc de Choiseul, who disliked the
intimacy of Louis XV. and of the Court with Saint-Germain, said
that the Count was "the son of a Portuguese Jew, WHO DECEIVES THE
COURT.  It is strange that the King is so often allowed to be
almost alone with this man, though, when he goes out, he is
surrounded by guards, as if he feared assassins everywhere."  This
anecdote is from the Memoirs of Gleichen, who had seen a great deal
of the world.  He died in 1807.

It seems a fair inference that the Duc de Choiseul knew what the
Dutch bankers knew, the story of the Count's being a child of a
princess retired to Bayonne--namely, the ex-Queen of Spain--and of
a Portuguese-Hebrew financier.  De Choiseul was ready to accept the
Jewish father, but thought that, in the matter of the royal mother,
Saint-Germain "deceived the Court."

A queen of Spain might have carried off any quantity of the
diamonds of Brazil.  The presents of diamonds from her almost
idiotic lord must have been among the few comforts of her situation
in a Court overridden by etiquette.  The reader of Madame
d'Aulnoy's contemporary account of the Court of Spain knows what a
dreadful dungeon it was.  Again, if born at Bayonne about 1706, the
Count would naturally seem to be about fifty in 1760.  The purity
with which he spoke German, and his familiarity with German
princely Courts--where I do not remember that Barry Lyndon ever met
him--are easily accounted for if he had a royal German to his
mother.  But, alas! if he was the son of a Hebrew financier,
Portuguese or Alsatian (as some said), he was likely, whoever his
mother may have been, to know German, and to be fond of precious
stones.  That Oriental taste notoriously abides in the hearts of
the Chosen People.[1]


[1] Voyage en Angleterre, 1770.


     "Nay, nefer shague your gory locks at me,
      Dou canst not say I did it,"


quotes Pinto, the hero of Thackeray's Notch on the Axe.  "He
pronounced it, by the way, I DIT it, by which I KNOW that Pinto was
a German," says Thackeray.  I make little doubt but that Saint-
Germain, too, was a German, whether by the mother's side, and of
princely blood, or quite the reverse.

Grosley mixes Saint-Germain up with a lady as mysterious as
himself, who also lived in Holland, on wealth of an unknown source,
and Grosley inclines to think that the Count found his way into a
French prison, where he was treated with extraordinary respect.

Von Gleichen, on the other hand, shows the Count making love to a
daughter of Madame Lambert, and lodging in the house of the mother.
Here Von Gleichen met the man of mystery and became rather intimate
with him.  Von Gleichen deemed him very much older than he looked,
but did not believe in his elixir.

In any case, he was not a cardsharper, a swindler, a professional
medium, or a spy.  He passed many evenings almost alone with Louis
XV., who, where men were concerned, liked them to be of good family
(about ladies he was much less exclusive).  The Count had a grand
manner; he treated some great personages in a cavalier way, as if
he were at least their equal.  On the whole, if not really the son
of a princess, he probably persuaded Louis XV. that he did come of
that blue blood, and the King would have every access to authentic
information.  Horace Walpole's reasons for thinking Saint-Germain
"not a gentleman" scarcely seem convincing.

The Duc de Choiseul did not like the fashionable Saint-Germain.  He
thought him a humbug, even when the doings of the deathless one
were perfectly harmless.  As far as is known, his recipe for health
consisted in drinking a horrible mixture called "senna tea"--which
was administered to small boys when I was a small boy--and in not
drinking anything at his meals.  Many people still observe this
regimen, in the interest, it is said, of their figures.  Saint-
Germain used to come to the house of de Choiseul, but one day, when
Von Gleichen was present, the minister lost his temper with his
wife.  He observed that she took no wine at dinner, and told her
that she had learned that habit of abstinence from Saint-Germain;
that HE might do as he pleased, "but you, madame, whose health is
precious to me, I forbid to imitate the regimen of such a dubious
character."  Gleichen, who tells the anecdote, says that he was
present when de Choiseul thus lost his temper with his wife.  The
dislike of de Choiseul had a mournful effect on the career of
Saint-Germain.

In discussing the strange story of the Chevalier d'Eon, one has
seen that Louis XV. amused himself by carrying on a secret scheme
of fantastic diplomacy through subordinate agents, behind the backs
and without the knowledge of his responsible ministers.  The Duc de
Choiseul, as Minister of Foreign Affairs, was excluded, it seems,
from all knowledge of these double intrigues, and the Marechal de
Belle-Isle, Minister of War, was obviously kept in the dark, as was
Madame de Pompadour.  Now it is stated by Von Gleichen that the
Marechal de Belle-Isle, from the War Office, started a NEW secret
diplomacy behind the back of de Choiseul, at the Foreign Office.
The King and Madame de Pompadour (who was not initiated into the
general scheme of the King's secret) were both acquainted with what
de Choiseul was not to know--namely, Belle-Isle's plan for secretly
making peace through the mediation, or management, at all events,
of Holland.  All this must have been prior to the death of the
Marechal de Belle-Isle in 1761; and probably de Broglie, who
managed the regular old secret policy of Louis XV., knew nothing
about this new clandestine adventure; at all events, the late Duc
de Broglie says nothing about it in his book The King's Secret.[1]


[1] The Duc de Broglie, I am privately informed, could find no clue
to the mystery of Saint-Germain.


The story, as given by Von Gleichen, goes on to say that Saint-
Germain offered to conduct the intrigue at the Hague.  As Louis XV.
certainly allowed that maidenly captain of dragoons, d'Eon, to
manage his hidden policy in London, it is not at all improbable
that he really intrusted this fresh cabal in Holland to Saint-
Germain, whom he admitted to great intimacy.  To The Hague went
Saint-Germain, diamonds, rubies, senna tea, and all, and began to
diplomatize with the Dutch.  But the regular French minister at The
Hague, d'Affry, found out what was going on behind his back--found
it out either because he was sharper than other ambassadors, or
because a personage so extraordinary as Saint-Germain was certain
to be very closely watched, or because the Dutch did not take to
the Undying One, and told d'Affry what he was doing.  D'Affry wrote
to de Choiseul.  An immortal but dubious personage, he said, was
treating in the interests of France, for peace, which it was
d'Affry's business to do if the thing was to be done at all.
Choiseul replied in a rage by the same courier.  Saint-Germain, he
said, must be extradited, bound hand and foot, and sent to the
Bastille.  Choiseul thought that he might practice his regimen and
drink his senna tea, to the advantage of public affairs, within
those venerable walls.  Then the angry minister went to the King,
told him what orders he had given, and said that, of course, in a
case of this kind it was superfluous to inquire as to the royal
pleasure.  Louis XV. was caught; so was the Marechal de Belle-Isle.
They blushed and were silent.

It must be remembered that this report of a private incident could
only come to the narrator, Von Gleichen, from de Choiseul, with
whom he professes to have been intimate.  The King and the Marechal
de Belle-Isle would not tell the story of their own discomfiture.
It is not very likely that de Choiseul himself would blab.
However, the anecdote avers that the King and the Minister for War
thought it best to say nothing, and the demand for Saint-Germain's
extradition was presented at The Hague.  But the Dutch were not
fond of giving up political offenders.  They let Saint-Germain have
a hint; he slipped over to London, and a London paper published a
kind of veiled interview with him in June 1760.

His name, we read, when announced after his death, will astonish
the world more than all the marvels of his life.  He has been in
England already (1743-17--?); he is a great unknown.  Nobody can
accuse him of anything dishonest or dishonorable.  When he was here
before we were all mad about music, and so he enchanted us with his
violin.  But Italy knows him as an expert in the plastic arts, and
Germany admires in him a master in chemical science.  In France,
where he was supposed to possess the secret of the transmutation of
metals, the police for two years sought and failed to find any
normal source of his opulence.  A lady of forty-five once swallowed
a whole bottle of his elixir.  Nobody recognized her, for she had
become a girl of sixteen without observing the transformation!

Saint-Germain is said to have remained in London but for a short
period.  Horace Walpole does not speak of him again, which is odd,
but probably the Count did not again go into society.  Our
information, mainly from Von Gleichen, becomes very misty, a thing
of surmises, really worthless.  The Count is credited with a great
part in the palace conspiracies of St. Petersburg; he lived at
Berlin, and, under the name of Tzarogy, at the Court of the
Margrave of Anspach.  Then he went, they say, to Italy, and then
north to the Landgrave Charles of Hesse, who dabbled in alchemy.
Here he is said to have died about 1780-85, leaving his papers to
the Landgrave but all is very vague after he disappeared from Paris
in 1760.  When next I meet Saint-Germain he is again at Paris,
again mysteriously rich, again he rather disappears than dies, he
calls himself Major Fraser, and the date is in the last years of
Louis Philippe.  My authority may be caviled at; it is that of the
late ingenious Mr. Van Damme, who describes Major Fraser in a book
on the characters of the Second Empire.  He does not seem to have
heard of Saint-Germain, whom he does not mention.

Major Fraser, "in spite of his English (sic) name, was decidedly
not English, though he spoke the language."  He was (like Saint-
Germain) "one of the best dressed men of the period. . . .  He
lived alone, and never alluded to his parentage.  He was always
flush of money, though the sources of his income were a mystery to
everyone."  The French police vainly sought to detect the origin of
Saint-Germain's supplies, opening his letters at the post-office.
Major Fraser's knowledge of every civilized country at every period
was marvelous, though he had very few books.  "His memory was
something prodigious. . . .  Strange to say, he used often to hint
that his was no mere book knowledge.  "'Of course, it is perfectly
ridiculous,'" he remarked, with a strange smile, "'but every now
and then I feel as if this did not come to me from reading, but
from personal experience.  At times I become almost convinced that
I lived with Nero, that I knew Dante personally, and so forth.'"[1]
At the major's death not a letter was found giving a clew to his
antecedents, and no money was discovered.  DID he die?  As in the
case of Saint-Germain, no date is given.  The author had an idea
that the major was "an illegitimate son of some exalted person" of
the period of Charles IV. and Ferdinand VII. of Spain.


[1] An Englishman in Paris, vol. i., pp. 130-133.  London, 1892.


The author does not mention Saint-Germain, and may never have heard
of him.  If his account of Major Fraser is not mere romance, in
that warrior we have the undying friend of Louis XV. and Madame de
Pompadour.  He had drunk at Medmenham with Jack Wilkes; as Riccio
he had sung duets with the fairest of unhappy queens; he had
extracted from Blanche de Bechamel the secret of Goby de Mouchy.
As Pinto, he told much of his secret history to Mr. Thackeray, who
says: "I am rather sorry to lose him after three little bits of
Roundabout Papers."

Did Saint-Germain really die in a palace of Prince Charles of Hesse
about 1780-85?  Did he, on the other hand, escape from the French
prison where Grosley thought he saw him, during the French
Revolution?  Was he known to Lord Lytton about 1860?  Was he then
Major Fraser?  Is he the mysterious Muscovite adviser of the Dalai
Lama?  Who knows?  He is a will-o'-the-wisp of the memoir-writers
of the eighteenth century.  Whenever you think you have a chance of
finding him in good authentic State papers, he gives you the slip;
and if his existence were not vouched for by Horace Walpole, I
should incline to deem him as Betsy Prig thought of Mrs. Harris.



The Man in the Iron Mask


I

THE LEGEND


The Mystery of the Man in the Iron Mask is, despite a pleasant
saying of Lord Beaconsfield's, one of the most fascinating in
history.  By a curious coincidence the wildest legend on the
subject, and the correct explanation of the problem, were offered
to the world in the same year, 1801.  According to this form of the
legend, the Man in the Iron Mask was the genuine Louis XIV.,
deprived of his rights in favor of a child of Anne of Austria and
of Mazarin.  Immured in the Isles Sainte-Marguerite, in the bay of
Cannes (where you are shown his cell, looking north to the sunny
town), he married, and begot a son.  That son was carried to
Corsica, was named de Buona Parte, and was the ancestor of
Napoleon.  The Emperor was thus the legitimate representative of
the House of Bourbon.

This legend was circulated in 1801, and is referred to in a
proclamation of the Royalists of La Vendee.  In the same year,
1801, Roux Fazaillac, a Citoyen and a revolutionary legislator,
published a work in which he asserted that the Man in the Iron Mask
(as known in rumor) was not one man, but a myth, in which the
actual facts concerning at least two men were blended.  It is
certain that Roux Fazaillac was right; or that, if he was wrong,
the Man in the Iron Mask was an obscure valet, of French birth,
residing in England, whose real name was Martin.

Before we enter on the topic of this poor menial's tragic history,
it may be as well to trace the progress of the romantic legend, as
it blossomed after the death of the Man, whose Mask was not of
iron, but of black velvet.  Later we shall show how the legend
struck root and flowered, from the moment when the poor valet,
Martin (by his prison pseudonym "Eustache Dauger"), was immured in
the French fortress of Pignerol, in Piedmont (August, 1669).

The Man, in connection with the Mask, is first known to us from a
kind of notebook kept by du Junca, Lieutenant of the Bastille.  On
September 18, 1698, he records the arrival of the new Governor of
the Bastille, M. de Saint-Mars, bringing with him, from his last
place, the Isles Sainte-Marguerite, in the bay of Camnes, "an old
prisoner whom he had at Pignerol.  He keeps the prisoner always
masked, his name is not spoken . . . and I have put him alone, in
the third chamber of the Bertaudiere tower, having furnished it
some days before with everything, by order of M. de Saint-Mars.
The prisoner is to be served and cared for by M. de Rosarges," the
officer next in command under Saint-Mars.[1]


[1] Funck-Brentano, Legendes et Archives de la Bastille, pp. 86,
87.  Paris, 1898, p. 277, a facsimile of this entry.


The prisoner's death is entered by du Junca on November 19, 1703.
To that entry we return later.

The existence of this prisoner was known and excited curiosity.  On
October 15, 1711, the Princess Palatine wrote about the case to the
Electress Sophia of Hanover, "A man lived for long years in the
Bastille, masked, and masked he died there.  Two musketeers were by
his side to shoot him if ever he unmasked.  He ate and slept in his
mask.  There must, doubtless, have been some good reason for this,
as otherwise he was very well treated, well lodged, and had
everything given to him that he wanted.  He took the Communion
masked; was very devout, and read perpetually."

On October 22, 1711, the Princess writes that the Mask was an
English nobleman, mixed up in the plot of the Duke of Berwick
against William III.--Fenwick's affair is meant.  He was imprisoned
and masked that the Dutch usurper might never know what had become
of him.[1]


[1] Op. cit. 98, note I.


The legend was now afloat in society.  The sub-commandant of the
Bastille from 1749 to 1787, Chevalier, declared, obviously on the
evidence of tradition, that all the Mask's furniture and clothes
were destroyed at his death, lest they might yield a clew to his
identity.  Louis XV. is said to have told Madame de Pompadour that
the Mask was "the minister of an Italian prince."  Louis XVI. told
Marie Antoinette (according to Madame de Campan) that the Mask was
a Mantuan intriguer, the same person as Louis XV. indicated.
Perhaps he was, it is one of two possible alternatives.  Voltaire,
in the first edition of his "Siecle de Louis XIV.," merely spoke of
a young, handsome, masked prisoner, treated with the highest
respect by Louvois, the Minister of Louis XIV.  At last, in
"Questions sur l'Encyclopedie" (second edition), Voltaire averred
that the Mask was the son of Anne of Austria and Mazarin, an elder
brother of Louis XIV.  Changes were rung on this note: the Mask was
the actual King, Louis XIV. was a bastard.  Others held that he was
James, Duke of Monmouth--or Moliere!  In 1770 Heiss identified him
with Mattioli, the Mantuan intriguer, and especially after the
appearance of the book by Roux Fazaillac, in 1801, that was the
generally accepted opinion.

It MAY be true, in part.  Mattioli MAY have been the prisoner who
died in the Bastille in November 1703, but the legend of the Mask's
prison life undeniably arose out of the adventure of our valet,
Martin or Eustache Dauger.


II

THE VALET'S HISTORY


After reading the arguments of the advocates of Mattioli, I could
not but perceive that, whatever captive died, masked, at the
Bastille in 1703, the valet Dauger was the real source of most of
the legends about the Man in the Iron Mask.  A study of M. Lair's
book "Nicholas Fouquet" (1890) confirmed this opinion.  I therefore
pushed the inquiry into a source neglected by the French
historians, namely, the correspondence of the English ambassadors,
agents, and statesmen for the years 1668, 1669.[1]  One result is
to confirm a wild theory of my own to the effect that the Man in
the Iron Mask (if Dauger were he) may have been as great a mystery
to himself as to historical inquirers.  He may not have known WHAT
he was imprisoned for doing!  More important is the probable
conclusion that the long and mysterious captivity of Eustache
Dauger, and of another perfectly harmless valet and victim, was the
mere automatic result of "red tape" of the old French absolute
monarchy.  These wretches were caught in the toils of the system,
and suffered to no purpose, for no crime.  The two men, at least
Dauger, were apparently mere supernumeraries in the obscure
intrigue of a conspirator known as Roux de Marsilly.


[1] The papers are in the Record Office; for the contents see the
following essay, The Valet's Master.


This truly abominable tragedy of Roux de Marsilly is "another
story," narrated in the following essay.  It must suffice here to
say that, in 1669, while Charles II. was negotiating the famous, or
infamous, secret treaty with Louis XIV.--the treaty of alliance
against Holland, and in favor of the restoration of Roman
Catholicism in England--Roux de Marsilly, a French Huguenot, was
dealing with Arlington and others, in favor of a Protestant league
against France.

When he started from England for Switzerland in February, 1669,
Marsilly left in London a valet called by him "Martin," who had
quitted his service and was living with his own family.  This man
is the "Eustache Dauger" of our mystery.  The name is his prison
pseudonym, as "Lestang" was that of Mattioli.  The French
Government was anxious to lay hands on him, for he had certainly,
as the letters of Marsilly prove, come and gone freely between that
conspirator and his English employers.  How much Dauger knew, what
amount of mischief he could effect, was uncertain.  Much or little,
it was a matter which, strange to say, caused the greatest anxiety
to Louis XIV. and to his Ministers for very many years.  Probably
long before Dauger died (the date is unknown, but it was more than
twenty-five years after Marsilly's execution), his secret, if
secret he possessed, had ceased to be of importance.  But he was
now in the toils of the French red tape, the system of secrecy
which rarely released its victim.  He was guarded, we shall see
with such unheard-of rigor that popular fancy at once took him for
some great, perhaps royal, personage.

Marsilly was publicly tortured to death in Paris on June 22, 1669.
By July 19 his ex-valet, Dauger, had entered on his mysterious term
of captivity.  How the French got possession of him, whether he
yielded to cajolery, or was betrayed by Charles II., is uncertain.
The French ambassador at St. James's, Colbert (brother of the
celebrated Minister), writes thus to M. de Lyonne, in Paris, on
July I, 1669:[1] "Monsieur Joly has spoken to the man Martin"
(Dauger), "and has really persuaded him that, by going to France
and telling all that he knows against Roux, he will play the part
of a lad of honor and a good subject."


[1] Transcripts from Paris MSS., Vol. xxxiii., Record Office.


But Martin, after all, was NOT persuaded!

Martin replied to Joly that he knew nothing at all, and that, once
in France, people would think he was well acquainted with the
traffickings of Roux, "and so he would be kept in prison to make
him divulge what he did not know."  The possible Man in the Iron
Mask did not know his own secret!  But, later in the conversation,
Martin foolishly admitted that he knew a great deal; perhaps he did
this out of mere fatal vanity.  Cross to France, however, he would
not, even when offered a safe-conduct and promise of reward.
Colbert therefore proposes to ask Charles to surrender the valet,
and probably Charles descended to the meanness.  By July 19, at all
events, Louvois, the War Minister of Louis XIV., was bidding Saint-
Mars, at Pignerol in Piedmont, expect from Dunkirk a prisoner of
the very highest importance--a valet!  This valet, now called
"Eustache Dauger," can only have been Marsilly's valet, Martin,
who, by one means or another, had been brought from England to
Dunkirk.  It is hardly conceivable, at least, that when a valet, in
England, is "wanted" by the French police on July 1, for political
reasons, and when by July 19 they have caught a valet of extreme
political importance, the two valets should be two different men.
Martin must be Dauger.

Here, then, by July 19, 1669, we find our unhappy serving man in
the toils.  Why was he to be handled with such mysterious rigor?
It is true that State prisoners of very little account were kept
with great secrecy.  But it cannot well be argued that they were
all treated with the extraordinary precautions which, in the case
of Dauger, were not relaxed for twenty-five or thirty years.  The
King says, according to Louvois, that the safe keeping of Dauger is
"of the last importance to his service."  He must have intercourse
with nobody.  His windows must be where nobody can pass; several
bolted doors must cut him off from the sound of human voices.
Saint-Mars himself, the commandant, must feed the valet daily.
"You must never, under any pretenses listen to what he may wish to
tell you.  You must threaten him with death if he speaks one word
except about his actual needs.  He is only a valet, and does not
need much furniture."[1]


[1] The letters are printed by Roux Fazaillac, Jung, Lair, and
others.


Saint-Mars replied that, in presence of M. de Vauroy, the chief
officer of Dunkirk (who carried Dauger thence to Pignerol), he had
threatened to run Dauger through the body if he ever dared to
speak, even to him, Saint-Mars.  He has mentioned this prisoner, he
says, to no mortal.  People believe that Dauger is a Marshal of
France, so strange and unusual are the precautions taken for his
security.

A Marshal of France!  The legend has begun.  At this time (1669)
Saint-Mars had in charge Fouquet, the great fallen Minister, the
richest and most dangerous subject of Louis XIV.  By-and-by he also
held Lauzun, the adventurous wooer of la Grande Mademoiselle.  But
it was not they, it was the valet, Dauger, who caused "sensation."

On February 20, 1672, Saint-Mars, for the sake of economy, wished
to use Dauger as valet to Lauzun.  This proves that Saint-Mars did
not, after all, see the necessity of secluding Dauger or thought
the King's fears groundless.  In the opinion of Saint-Mars, Dauger
did not want to be released, "would never ask to be set free."
Then why was he so anxiously guarded?  Louvois refused to let
Dauger be put with Lauzun as valet.  In 1675, however, he allowed
Dauger to act as valet to Fouquet, but with Lauzun, said Louvois,
Dauger must have no intercourse.  Fouquet had then another prisoner
valet, La Riviere.  This man had apparently been accused of no
crime.  He was of a melancholy character, and a dropsical habit of
body: Fouquet had amused himself by doctoring him and teaching him
to read.

In the month of December, 1678, Saint-Mars, the commandant of the
prison, brought to Fouquet a sealed letter from Louvois, the seal
unbroken.  His own reply was also to be sealed, and not to be seen
by Saint-Mars.  Louvois wrote that the King wished to know one
thing, before giving Fouquet ampler liberty.  Had his valet,
Eustache Dauger, told his other valet, La Riviere, what he had done
before coming to Pignerol? (de ce a quoi il a ete employe aupravant
que d'etre a Pignerol).  "His Majesty bids me ask you [Fouquet]
this question, and expects that you will answer without considering
anything but the truth, that he may know what measures to take,"
these depending on whether Dauger has, or has not, told La Riviere
the story of his past life.[1]  Moreover, Lauzun was never, said
Louvois, to be allowed to enter Fouquet's room when Dauger was
present.  The humorous point is that, thanks to a hole dug in the
wall between his room and Fouquet's, Lauzun saw Dauger whenever he
pleased.


[1] Lair, Nicholas Foucquet, ii. pp. 463, 464.


From the letter of Louvois to Fouquet, about Dauger (December 23,
1678), it is plain that Louis XIV. had no more pressing anxiety,
nine years after Dauger's arrest, than to conceal what it was that
Dauger had done.  It is apparent that Saint-Mars himself either was
unacquainted with this secret, or was supposed by Louvois and the
King to be unaware of it.  He had been ordered never to allow
Dauger to tell him; he was not allowed to see the letters on the
subject between Lauzun and Fouquet.  We still do not know, and
never shall know, whether Dauger himself knew his own secret, or
whether (as he had anticipated) he was locked up for not divulging
what he did not know.

The answer of Fouquet to Louvois must have satisfied Louis that
Dauger had not imparted his secret to the other valet, La Riviere,
for Fouquet was now allowed a great deal of liberty.  In 1679, he
might see his family, the officers of the garrison, and Lauzun--it
being provided that Lauzun and Dauger should never meet.  In March,
1680, Fouquet died, and henceforth the two valets were most
rigorously guarded; Dauger, because he was supposed to know
something; La Riviere, because Dauger might have imparted the real
or fancied secret to him.  We shall return to these poor serving
men, but here it is necessary to state that, ten months before the
death of their master, Fouquet, an important new captive had been
brought to the prison of Pignerol.

This captive was the other candidate for the honors of the Mask,
Count Mattioli, the secretary of the Duke of Mantua.  He was
kidnaped on Italian soil on May 2, 1679, and hurried to the
mountain fortress of Pignerol, then on French ground.  His offense
was the betraying of the secret negotiations for the cession of the
town and fortress of Casal, by the Duke of Mantua, to Louis XIV.
The disappearance of Mattioli was, of course, known to the world.
The cause of his enlevement, and the place of his captivity,
Pignerol, were matters of newspaper comment at least as early as
1687.  Still earlier, in 1682, the story of Mattioli's arrest and
seclusion in Pignerol had been published in a work named "La
Prudenza Trionfante di Casale."[1]  There was thus no mystery, at
the time, about Mattioli; his crime and punishment were perfectly
well known to students of politics.  He has been regarded as the
mysterious Man in the Iron Mask, but, for years after his arrest,
he was the least mysterious of State prisoners.


[1] Brentano, op. cit., p. 117.


Here, then, is Mattioli in Pignerol in May, 1679.  While Fouquet
then enjoyed relative freedom, while Lauzun schemed escapes or made
insulting love to Mademoiselle Fouquet, Mattioli lived on the bread
and water of affliction.  He was threatened with torture to make
him deliver up some papers compromising Louis XIV.  It was
expressly commanded that he should have nothing beyond the barest
necessaries of life.  He was to be kept dans la dure prison.  In
brief, he was used no better than the meanest of prisoners.  The
awful life of isolation, without employment, without books, without
writing materials, without sight or sound of man save when Saint-
Mars or his lieutenant brought food for the day, drove captives
mad.

In January, 1680, two prisoners, a monk[1] and one Dubreuil, had
become insane.  By February 14, 1680, Mattioli was daily conversing
with God and his angels.  "I believe his brain is turned," says
Saint-Mars.  In March, 1680, as we saw, Fouquet died.  The
prisoners, not counting Lauzun (released soon after), were now
five: (1) Mattioli (mad); (2) Dubreuil (mad); (3) The monk (mad);
(4) Dauger, and (5) La Riviere.  These two, being employed as
valets, kept their wits.  On the death of Fouquet, Louvois wrote to
Saint-Mars about the two valets.  Lauzun must be made to believe
that they had been set at liberty, but, in fact, they must be most
carefully guarded IN A SINGLE CHAMBER.  They were shut up in one of
the dungeons of the "Tour d'en bas."  Dauger had recently done
something as to which Louvois writes: "Let me know how Dauger can
possibly have done what you tell me, and how he got the necessary
drugs, as I cannot suppose that you supplied him with them" (July
10, 1680).[2]


[1] A monk, who MAY have been this monk, appears in the following
essay, p. 34, infra.

[2] Lair, Nicholas Foucquet, ii., pp. 476, 477.


Here, then, by July, 1680, are the two valets locked in one dungeon
of the "Tour d'en bas."  By September Saint-Mars had placed
Mattioli, with the mad monk, in another chamber of the same tower.
He writes: "Mattioli is almost as mad as the monk," who arose from
bed and preached naked.  Mattioli behaved so rudely and violently
that the lieutenant of Saint-Mars had to show him a whip, and
threaten him with a flogging.  This had its effect.  Mattioli, to
make his peace, offered a valuable ring to Blainvilliers.  The ring
was kept to be restored to him, if ever Louis let him go free--a
contingency mentioned more than once in the correspondence.

Apparently Mattioli now sobered down, and probably was given a
separate chamber and a valet; he certainly had a valet at Pignerol
later.  By May 1681, Dauger and La Riviere still occupied their
common chamber in the "Tour d'en bas."  They were regarded by
Louvois as the most important of the five prisoners then at
Pignerol.  They, not Mattioli, were the captives about whose safe
and secret keeping Louis and Louvois were most anxious.  This
appears from a letter of Louvois to Saint-Mars, of May 12, 1681.
The jailer, Saint-Mars, is to be promoted from Pignerol to Exiles.
"Thither," says Louvois, "the king desires to transport such of
your prisoners as he thinks too important to have in other hands
than yours."  These prisoners are "the two in the low chamber of
the tower," the two valets, Dauger and La Riviere.

From a letter of Saint-Mars (June, 1681) we know that Mattioli was
not one of these.  He says: "I shall keep at Exiles two birds
(merles) whom I have here: they are only known as the gentry of the
low room in the tower; Mattioli may stay on here at Pignerol with
the other prisoners" (Dubreuil and the mad monk).  It is at this
point that Le Citoyen Roux (Fazaillac), writing in the Year IX. of
the Republic (1801), loses touch with the secret.[1]  Roux finds,
in the State Papers, the arrival of Eustache Dauger at Pignerol in
1669, but does not know who he is, or what is his quality.  He sees
that the Mask must be either Mattioli, Dauger, the monk, one
Dubreuil, or one Calazio.  But, overlooking or not having access to
the letter of Saint-Mars of June, 1681, Roux holds that the
prisoners taken to Les Exiles were the monk and Mattioli.  One of
these must be the Mask, and Roux votes for Mattioli.  He is wrong.
Mattioli beyond all doubt remained at Pignerol.


[1] Recherches Historiques sur l'Homme au Masque de Fer, Paris.
An. IX.


Mountains of argument have been built on these words, deux merles,
"two jail-birds."  One of the two, we shall see, became the source
of the legend of the Man in the Iron Mask.  "How can a wretched
jail-bird (merle) have been the Mask?" asks M. Topin.  "The rogue's
whole furniture and table-linen were sold for 1l. 19s.  He only got
a new suit of clothes every three years."  All very true; but this
jail-bird and his mate, by the direct statement of Louvois, are
"the prisoners too important to be intrusted to other hands than
yours"--the hands of Saint-Mars--while Mattioli is so unimportant
that he may be left at Pignerol under Villebois.

The truth is, that the offense and the punishment of Mattioli were
well known to European diplomatists and readers of books.  Casal,
moreover, at this time was openly ceded to Louis XIV., and Mattioli
could not have told the world more than it already knew.  But, for
some inscrutable reason, the secret which Dauger knew, or was
suspected of knowing, became more and more a source of anxiety to
Louvois and Louis.  What can he have known?  The charges against
his master, Roux de Marsilly, had been publicly proclaimed.  Twelve
years had passed since the dealings of Arlington with Marsilly.
Yet, Louvois became more and more nervous.

In accordance with commands of his, on March 2, 1682, the two
valets, who had hitherto occupied one chamber at Exiles as at
Pignerol, were cut off from all communication with each other.
Says Saint-Mars, "Since receiving your letter I have warded the
pair as strictly and exactly as I did M. Fouquet and M. Lauzun, who
cannot brag that he sent or received any intelligence.  Night and
day two sentinels watch their tower; and my own windows command a
view of the sentinels.  Nobody speaks to my captives but myself, my
lieutenant, their confessor, and the doctor, who lives eighteen
miles away, and only sees them when I am present."  Years went by;
in January, 1687, one of the two captives died; we really do not
know which with absolute certainty.  However, the intensified
secrecy with which the survivor was now guarded seems more
appropriate to Dauger and M. Funck-Brentano and M. Lair have no
doubt that it was La Riviere who expired.  He was dropsical, that
appears in the official correspondence, and the dead prisoner died
of dropsy.

As for the strange secrecy about Dauger, here is an example.
Saint-Mars, in January, 1687, was appointed to the fortress of the
Isles Sainte-Marguerite, that sun themselves in the bay of Cannes.
On January 20 he asks leave to go to see his little kingdom.  He
must leave Dauger, but has forbidden even his lieutenant to speak
to that prisoner.  This was an increase of precaution since 1682.
He wishes to take the captive to the Isles, but how?  A sedan chair
covered over with oilcloth seems best.  A litter might break down,
litters often did, and some one might then see the passenger.

Now M. Funck-Brentano says, to minimize the importance of Dauger,
"he was shut up like so much luggage in a chair hermetically closed
with oilcloth, carried by eight Piedmontese relays of four."

Luggage is not usually carried in hermetically sealed sedan chairs,
but Saint-Mars has explained why, by surplus of precaution, he did
not use a litter.  The litter might break down and Dauger might be
seen.  A new prison was built specially, at the cost of 5,000
lires, for Dauger at Sainte-Marguerite, with large sunny rooms.  On
May 3, 1687, Saint-Mars had entered on his island realm, Dauger
being nearly killed by twelve days' journey in a closed chair.  He
again excited the utmost curiosity.  On January 8, 1688, Saint-Mars
writes that his prisoner is believed by the world to be either a
son of Oliver Cromwell, or the Duc de Beaufort,[1] who was never
seen again, dead or alive, after a night battle in Crete, on June
25, 1669, just before Dauger was arrested.  Saint-Mars sent in a
note of the TOTAL of Dauger's expenses for the year 1687.  He
actually did not dare to send the ITEMS, he says, lest they, if the
bill fell into the wrong hands, might reveal too much.


[1] Duc de Beaufort whom Athos releases from prison in Dumas's
Vingt Ans Apres.


Meanwhile, an Italian news-letter, copied into a Leyden paper, of
August 1687, declared that Mattioli had just been brought from
Pignerol to Sainte-Marguerite.  There was no mystery about
Mattioli, the story of his capture was published in 1682, but the
press, on one point, was in error; Mattioli was still at Pignerol.
The known advent of the late Commandant of Pignerol, Saint-Mars,
with a single concealed prisoner, at the island, naturally
suggested the erroneous idea that the prisoner was Mattioli.  The
prisoner was really Dauger, the survivor of the two valets.

From 1688 to 1691 no letter about Dauger has been published.
Apparently he was then the only prisoner on the island, except one
Chezut, who was there before Dauger arrived, and gave up his
chamber to Dauger while the new cells were being built.  Between
1689 and 1693 six Protestant preachers were brought to the island,
while Louvois, the Minister, died in 1691, and was succeeded by
Barbezieux.  On August 13, 1691, Barbezieux wrote to ask Saint-Mars
about "the prisoner whom he had guarded for twenty years."  The
only such prisoner was Dauger, who entered Pignerol in August,
1669.  Mattioli had been a prisoner only for twelve years, and lay
in Pignerol, not in Sainte-Marguerite, where Saint-Mars now was.
Saint-Mars replied: "I can assure you that NOBODY HAS SEEN HIM BUT
MYSELF."

By the beginning of March, 1694, Pignerol had been bombarded by the
enemies of France; presently Louis XIV. had to cede it to Savoy.
The prisoners there must be removed.  Mattioli, in Pignerol, at the
end of 1693, had been in trouble.  He and his valet had tried to
smuggle out letters written on the linings of their pockets.  These
were seized and burned.  On March 20, 1694, Barbezieux wrote to
Laprade, now commanding at Pignerol, that he must take his three
prisoners, one by one, with all secrecy, to Sainte-Marguerite.
Laprade alone must give them their food on the journey.  The
military officer of the escort was warned to ask no questions.
Already (February 26, 1694) Barbezieux had informed Saint-Mars that
these prisoners were coming.  They are of more consequence, one of
them at least, than the prisoners on the island, and must be put in
the safest places."  The "one" is doubtless Mattioli.  In 1681
Louvois had thought Dauger and La Riviere more important than
Mattioli, who, in March, 1694, came from Pignerol to Sainte-
Marguerite.  Now in April, 1694, a prisoner died at the island, a
prisoner who, like Mattioli, HAD A VALET.  We hear of no other
prisoner on the island, except Mattioli who had a valet.  A letter
of Saint-Mars (January 6, 1696) proves that no prisoner THEN had a
valet, for each prisoner collected his own dirty plates and dishes,
piled them up, and handed them to the lieutenant.

M. Funck-Brentano argues that in this very letter (January 6, 1696)
Saint-Mars speaks of "les valets de messieurs les prisonniers."
But in THAT part of the letter Saint-Mars is not speaking of the
actual state of things at Sainte-Marguerite, but is giving
reminiscences of Fouquet and Lauzun, who, of course, at Piguerol,
had valets, and had money, as he shows.  Dauger had no money.  M.
Funck-Brentano next argues that early in 1694 one of the preacher
prisoners, Melzac, died, and cites M. Jung ("La Verite sur le
Masque de Fer," p. 91).  This is odd, as M. Jung says that Melzac,
or Malzac, "died in the end of 1692, or early in 1693."  Why, then,
does M. Funck-Brentano cite M. Jung for the death of the preacher
early in 1694, when M. Jung (conjecturally) dates his decease at
least a year earlier?[1]  It is not a mere conjecture as, on March
3, 1693, Barbezieux begs Saint-Mars to mention his Protestant
prisoners under nicknames. There are THREE, and Malzac is no longer
one of them.  Malzac, in 1692, suffered from a horrible disease,
discreditable to one of the godly, and in October, 1692, had been
allowed medical expenses.  Whether they included a valet or not,
Malzac seems to have been non-existent by March, 1693.  Had he
possessed a valet, and had he died in 1694, why should HIS valet
have been "shut up in the vaulted prison"?  This was the fate of
the valet of the prisoner who died in April, 1694, and was probably
Mattioli.


[1] M. Funck-Brentano's statement is in Revue Historique, lvi. p.
298.  "Malzac died at the beginning of 1694," citing Jung, p. 91.
Now on p. 91 M. Jung writes, "At the beginning of 1694 Saint-Mars
had six prisoners, of whom one Melzac, dies."  But M. Jung (pp.
269, 270) later writes, "It is probable that Melzac died at the end
of 1692, or early in 1693," and he gives his reasons, which are
convincing.  M. Funck-Brentano must have overlooked M. Jung's
change of opinion between his p. 91 and his pp. 269, 270.


Mattioli, certainly, had a valet in December, 1693, at Pignerol.
He went to Sainte-Marguerite in March, 1694.  In April, 1694, a
prisoner with a valet died at Sainte-Marguerite.  In January, 1696,
no prisoner at Sainte-Marguerite had a valet.  Therefore, there is
a strong presumption that the "prisonnier au valet" who died in
April, was Mattioli.

After December, 1693, when he was still at Pignerol, the name of
Mattioli, freely used before, never occurs in the correspondence.
But we still often hear of "l'ancien prisonnier," "the old
prisoner."  He was, on the face of it, Dauger, by far the oldest
prisoner.  In 1688, Saint-Mars, having only one prisoner (Dauger),
calls him merely "my prisoner.  In 1691, when Saint-Mars had
several prisoners, Barbezieux styles Dauger "your prisoner of
twenty years' standing."  When, in 1696-1698, Saint-Mars mentions
"mon ancien prisonnier," "my prisoner of long standing," he
obviously means Dauger, not Mattioli--above all, if Mattioli died
in 1694.  M. Funck-Brentano argues that "mon ancien prisonnier" can
only mean "my erstwhile prisoner, he who was lost and is restored
to me"--that is, Mattioli.  This is not the view of M. Jung, or M.
Lair, or M. Loiseleur.

Friends of Mattioli's claims rest much on this letter of Barbezieux
to Saint-Mars (November 17, 1697): "You have only to watch over the
security of all your prisoners, without ever explaining to anyone
what it is that your prisoner of long standing did."  That secret,
it is argued, MUST apply to Mattioli.  But all the world knew what
Mattioli had done!  Nobody knew, and nobody knows, what Eustache
Dauger had done.  It was one of the arcana imperii.  It is the
secret enforced ever since Dauger's arrest in 1669.  Saint-Mars
(1669) was not to ask.  Louis XIV. could only lighten the captivity
of Fouquet (1678) if his valet, La Riviere, did not know what
Dauger had done.  La Riviere (apparently a harmless man) lived and
died in confinement, the sole reason being that he might perhaps
know what Dauger had done.  Consequently there is the strongest
presumption that the "ancien prisonnier" of 1697 is Dauger, and
that "what he had done" (which Saint-Mars must tell to no one) was
what Dauger did, not what Mattioli did.  All Europe knew what
Mattioli had done; his whole story had been published to the world
in 1682 and 1687.

On July 19, 1698, Barbezieux bade Saint-Mars come to assume the
command of the Bastille.  He is to bring his "old prisoner," whom
not a soul is to see.  Saint-Mars therefore brought his man MASKED,
exactly as another prisoner was carried masked from Provence to the
Bastille in 1695.  M. Funck-Brentano argues that Saint-Mars was now
quite fond of his old Mattioli, so noble, so learned.

At last, on September 18, 1698, Saint-Mars lodged his "old
prisoner" in the Bastille, "an old prisoner whom he had at
Pignerol," says the journal of du Junca, Lieutenant of the
Bastille.  His food, we saw, was brought him by Rosarges alone, the
"Major," a gentleman who had always been with Saint-Mars.  Argues
M. Funck-Brentano, all this proves that the captive was a
gentleman, not a valet.  Why?  First, because the Bastille, under
Louis XIV., was "une prison de distinction."  Yet M. Funck-Brentano
tells us that in Mazarin's time "valets mixed up with royal plots"
were kept in the Bastille.  Again, in 1701, in this "noble prison,"
the Mask was turned out of his room to make place for a female
fortune-teller, and was obliged to chum with a profligate valet of
nineteen, and a "beggarly" bad patriot, who "blamed the conduct of
France, and approved that of other nations, especially the Dutch."
M. Funck-Brentano himself publishes these facts (1898), in part
published earlier (1890) by M. Lair.[1]  Not much noblesse here!
Next, if Rosarges, a gentleman, served the Mask, Saint-Mars alone
(1669) carried his food to the valet, Dauger.  So the service of
Rosarges does not ennoble the Mask and differentiate him from
Dauger, who was even more nobly served, by Saint-Mars.


[1] Legendes de la Bastille, pp. 86-89.  Citing du Junca's Journal,
April 30, 1701.


On November 19, 1703, the Mask died suddenly (still in his velvet
mask), and was buried on the 20th.  The parish register of the
church names him "Marchialy" or "Marchioly," one may read it either
way; du Junca, Lieutenant of the Bastille, in his contemporary
journal, calls him "M. de Marchiel."  Now, Saint-Mars often spells
Mattioli, "Marthioly."

This is the one strength of the argument for Mattioli's claims to
the Mask.  M. Lair replies, "Saint-Mars had a mania for burying
prisoners under fancy names," and gives examples.  One is only a
gardener, Francois Eliard (1701), concerning whom it is expressly
said that, as he is a prisoner, his real name is not to be given,
so he is registered as Pierre Maret (others read Navet, "Peter
Turnip").  If Saint-Mars, looking about for a false name for
Dauger's burial register, hit on Marsilly (the name of Dauger's old
master), that MIGHT be miswritten Marchialy.  However it be, the
age of the Mask is certainly falsified; the register gives "about
forty-five years old."  Mattioli would have been sixty-three;
Dauger cannot have been under fifty-three.

There the case stands.  If Mattioli died in April, 1694, he cannot
be the Man in the Iron Mask.  Of Dauger's death we find no record,
unless he was the Man in the Iron Mask, and died, in 1703, in the
Bastille.  He was certainly, in 1669 and 1688, at Pignerol and at
Sainte-Marguerite, the center of the mystery about some great
prisoner, a Marshal of France, the Duc de Beaufort, or a son of
Oliver Cromwell.  Mattioli was not mystery, no secret.  Dauger is
so mysterious that probably the secret of his mystery was unknown
to himself.  By 1701, when obscure wretches were shut up with the
Mask, the secret, whatever its nature, had ceased to be of moment.
The captive was now the mere victim of cruel routine.  But twenty
years earlier, Saint-Mars had said that Dauger "takes things
easily, resigned to the will of God and the King."

To sum up, on July 1, 1669, the valet of the Huguenot intriguer,
Roux de Marsilly, the valet resident in England, known to his
master as "Martin," was "wanted" by the French secret police.  By
July 19, a valet, of the highest political importance, had been
brought to Dunkirk, from England, no doubt.  My hypothesis assumes
that this valet, though now styled "Eustache Dauger," was the
"Martin of Roux de Marsilly.  He was kept with so much mystery at
Pigernol that already the legend began its course; the captive
valet was said to be a Marshal of France!  We then follow Dauger
from Pignerol to Les Exiles, till January, 1687, when one valet out
of a pair, Dauger being one of them, dies.  We presume that Dauger
is the survivor, because the great mystery still is "what he HAS
DONE," whereas the other valet had done nothing, but may have known
Dauger's secret.  Again the other valet had long been dropsical,
and the valet who died in 1687 died of dropsy.

In 1688, Dauger, at Sainte-Marguerite, is again the source and
center of myths; he is taken for a son of Oliver Cromwell, or for
the Duc de Beufort.  In June 1692, one of the Huguenot preachers at
Saint-Marguerite writes on his shirt and pewter plate and throws
them out of the window.[1]  Legend attributes these acts to the Man
in the Iron Mask, and transmutes a pewter into a silver plate.
Now, in 1689-1693, Mattioli was at Pignerol, but Dauger was at
Sainte-Marguerite, and the Huguenot's act is attributed to him.
Thus Dauger, not Mattioli, is the center round which the myths
crystallize: the legends concern him, not Mattioli, whose case is
well known, and gives rise to no legend.  Finally, we have shown
that Mattioli probably died at Sainte-Marguerite in April, 1694.
If so, then nobody but Dauger can be the "old prisoner" whom Saint-
Mars brought, masked, to the Bastille, in September, 1698, and who
died there in November, 1703.  However suppose that Mattioli did
not die in 1694, but was the masked man who died in the Bastille in
1703, then the legend of Dauger came to be attributed to Mattioli:
these two men's fortunes are combined in the one myth.


[1] Saint-Mars au Ministre, June 4, 1692.


The central problem remains unsolved.

What had the valet, Eustache Dauger, done?[1]


[1] One marvels that nobody has recognized, in the mask, James
Stuart (James de la Cloche), eldest of the children of Charles II.
He came to England in 1668, was sent to Rome, and "disappears from
history."  See infra, "The Mystery of James de la Cloche."


III

THE VALET'S MASTER


The secret of the Man in the Iron Mask, or at least of one of the
two persons who have claims to be the Mask, was "What had Eustache
Dauger done?"  To guard this secret the most extraordinary
precautions were taken, as we have shown in the foregoing essay.
And yet, if secret there was, it might have got wind in the
simplest fashion.  In the "Vicomte de Bragelonne," Dumas describes
the tryst of the Secret-hunters with the dying Chief of the Jesuits
at the inn in Fontainebleau.  They come from many quarters, there
is a Baron of Germany and a laird from Scotland, but Aramis takes
the prize.  He knows the secret of the Mask, the most valuable of
all to the intriguers of the Company of Jesus.

Now, despite all the precautions of Louvois and Saint-Mars, despite
sentinels for ever posted under Dauger's windows, despite
arrangements which made it impossible for him to signal to people
on the hillside at Les Exiles, despite the suppression even of the
items in the accounts of his expenses, his secret, if he knew it,
could have been discovered, as we have remarked, by the very man
most apt to make mischievous use of it--by Lauzun.  That brilliant
and reckless adventurer could see Dauger, in prison at Pignerol,
when he pleased, for he had secretly excavated a way into the rooms
of his fellow prisoner, Fouquet, on whom Dauger attended as valet.
Lauzun was released soon after Fouquet's death.  It is unlikely
that he bought his liberty by the knowledge of the secret and there
is nothing to suggest that he used it (if he possessed it) in any
other way.

The natural clew to the supposed secret of Dauger is a study of the
career of his master, Roux de Marsilly.  As official histories say
next to nothing about him, we may set forth what can be gleaned
from the State Papers in our Record Office.  The earliest is a
letter of Roux de Marsilly to Mr. Joseph Williamson, secretary of
Lord Arlington (December, 1668).  Marsilly sends Martin (on our
theory Eustache Dauger) to bring back from Williamson two letters
from his own correspondent in Paris.  He also requests Williamson
to procure for him from Arlington a letter of protection, as he is
threatened with arrest for some debt in which he is not really
concerned.  Martin will explain.  The next paper is indorsed
"Received December 28, 1668, Mons. de Marsilly."  As it is dated
December 27, Marsilly must have been in England.  The contents of
this piece deserve attention, because they show the terms on which
Marsilly and Arlington were, or, at least, how Marsilly conceived
them.

(1) Marsilly reports, on the authority of his friends at Stockholm,
that the King of Sweden intends, first to intercede with Louis XIV.
in favor of the French Huguenots, and next, if diplomacy fails, to
join in arms with the other Protestant Powers of Europe.

(2) His correspondent in Holland learns that if the King of England
invites the States to any "holy resolution," they will heartily
lend forces.  No leader so good as the English King--Charles II.!
Marsilly had shown ARLINGTON'S LETTER to a Dutch friend, who bade
him approach the Dutch ambassador in England.  He has dined with
that diplomatist.  Arlington had, then, gone so far as to write an
encouraging letter.  The Dutch ambassador had just told Marsilly
that he had received the same news, namely, that, Holland would aid
the Huguenots, persecuted by Louis XIV.

(3) Letters from Provence, Languedoc, and Dauphine say that the
situation there is unaltered.

(4) The Canton of Zurich write that they will keep their promises
and that Berne is anxious to please the King of Great Britain, and
that it is ready to raise, with Zurich, 15,000 men.  They are not
afraid of France.

(5) Zurich fears that, if Charles is not represented at the next
Diet, Bale and Saint Gall will be intimidated, and not dare to join
the Triple Alliance of Spain, Holland, and England.  The best plan
will be for Marsilly to represent England at the Diet of January
25, 1669, accompanied by the Swiss General Balthazar.  This will
encourage friends "to give His Britannic Majesty the satisfaction
which he desires, and will produce a close union between Holland,
Sweden, the Cantons, and other Protestant States."

This reads as if Charles had already expressed some "desire."

(6) Geneva grumbles at a reply of Charles "through a bishop who is
their enemy," the Bishop of London, "a persecutor of our religion,"
that is, of Presbyterianism.  However, nothing will dismay the
Genevans, "si S. M. B. ne change."

Then comes a blank in the paper.  There follows a copy of a letter
as if from Charles II. himself, to "the Right High and Noble
Seigneurs of Zurich."  He has heard of their wishes from Roux de
Marsilly, whom he commissions to wait upon them.  "I would not have
written by my Bishop of London had I been better informed, but
would myself have replied to your obliging letter, and would have
assured you, as I do now, that I desire. . . ."

It appears as if this were a draft of a kind of letter which
Marsilly wanted Charles to write to Zurich, and there is a similar
draft of a letter for Arlington to follow, if he and Charles wish
to send Marsilly to the Swiss Diet.  The Dutch ambassador, with
whom Marsilly dined on December 26, the Constable of Castille, and
other grandees, are all of opinion that he should visit the
Protestant Swiss, as from the King of England.  The scheme is for
an alliance of England, Holland, Spain, and the Protestant Cantons,
against France and Savoy.

Another letter of Marsilly to Arlington, only dated Jeudi, avers
that he can never repay Arlington for his extreme kindness and
liberality.  "No man in England is more devoted to you than I am,
and shall be all my life."[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 125, 106.


On the very day when Marsilly drafted for Charles his own
commission to treat with Zurich for a Protestant alliance against
France, Charles himself wrote to his sister, Madame (Henriette
d'Orleans).  He spoke of his secret treaty with France.  "You know
how much secrecy is necessary for the carrying on of the business,
and I assure you that nobody does, nor shall, know anything of it
here, but myself and that one person more, till it be fit to be
public."[1]  (Is "that one person" de la Cloche?)


[1] Madame, by Julia Cartwright, p. 275.


Thus Marsilly thought Charles almost engaged for the Protestant
League, while Charles was secretly allying himself with France
against Holland.  Arlington was probably no less deceived by
Charles than Marsilly was.

The Bishop of London's share in the dealing with Zurich is obscure.

It appears certain that Arlington was not consciously deceiving
Marsilly.  Madame wrote, on February 12, as to Arlington, "The
man's attachment to the Dutch and his inclination towards Spain are
too well known."[1]  Not till April 25, 1669, does Charles tell his
sister that Arlington has an inkling of his secret dealings with
France; how he knows, Charles cannot tell.[2]  It is impossible for
us to ascertain how far Charles himself deluded Marsilly, who went
to the Continent early in spring, 1669.  Before May 15-25, 1669, in
fact on April 14, Marsilly had been kidnaped by agents of Louis
XIV., and his doom was dight.  Here is the account of the matter,
written to ---- by Perwich in Paris:


[1] Ibid., p. 281.

[2] Ibid., p. 285.


"W. Perwich to ----

"Paris, May 25, '69.

"Honored Sir,

"The Cantons of Switzerland are much troubled at the French King's
having sent fifteen horsemen into Switzerland from whence the Sr de
Manille, the King's resident there, had given information of the Sr
Roux de Marsilly's being there negotiating the bringing the Cantons
into the Triple League by discourses much to the disadvantage of
France, giving them very ill impressions of the French King's
Government, who was betrayed by a monk that kept him company and
intercepted by the said horsemen brought into France and is
expected at the Bastille.  I believe you know the man. . . . I
remember him in England."


Can this monk be the monk who went mad in prison at Pignerol,
sharing the cell of Mattioli?  Did he, too, suffer for his
connection with the secret?  We do not know, but the position of
Charles was awkward.  Marsilly, dealing with the Swiss, had come
straight from England, where he was lie with Charles's minister,
Arlington, and with the Dutch and Spanish ambassadors.  The King
refers to the matter in a letter to his sister of May 24, 1669
(misdated by Miss Cartwright, May 24, 1668.)[1]


[1] Madame, by Julia Cartwright, p. 264.


"You have, I hope, received full satisfaction by the last post in
the matter of Marsillac [Marsilly], for my Ld. Arlington has sent
to Mr. Montague [English ambassador at Paris] his history all the
time he was here, by which you will see how little credit he had
here, and that particularly my Lord Arlington was not in his good
graces, because he did not receive that satisfaction, in his
negotiation, he expected, and that was only in relation to the
Swissers, and so I think I have said enough of this matter."

Charles took it easily!


On May 15/25 Montague acknowledged Arlington's letter to which
Charles refers; he has been approached, as to Marsilly, by the
Spanish resident, "but I could not tell how to do anything in the
business, never having heard of the man, or that he was employed by
my Master [Charles] in any business.  I have sent you also a copy
of a letter which an Englishman writ to me that I do not know, in
behalf of Roux de Marsilly, but that does not come by the post,"
being too secret.[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


France had been well-informed about Marsilly while he was in
England.  He then had a secretary, two lackeys, and a valet de
chambre, and was frequently in conference with Arlington and the
Spanish ambassador to the English Court.  Colbert, the French
ambassador in London, had written all this to the French
Government, on April 25, before he heard of Marsilly's arrest.[1]


[1] Bibl. Nat., Fonds. Francais, No. 10665.


The belief that Marsilly was an agent of Charles appears to have
been general, and, if accepted by Louis XIV., would interfere with
Charles's private negotiations for the Secret Treaty with France.
On May 18 Prince d'Aremberg had written on the subject to the
Spanish ambassador in Paris.  Marsilly, he says, was arrested in
Switzerland, on his way to Berne, with a monk who was also seized,
and, a curious fact, Marsilly's valet was killed in the struggle.
This valet, of course, was not Dauger, whom Marsilly had left in
England.  Marsilly "doit avoir demande la protection du Roy de la
Grande Bretagne en faveur des Religionaires (Huguenots) de France,
et passer en Suisse avec quelque commission de sa part."
D'Aremberg begs the Spanish ambassador to communicate all this to
Montague, the English ambassador at Paris, but Montague probably,
like Perwich, knew nothing of the business any more than he knew of
Charles's secret dealings with Louis through Madame.[1]


[1] State Papers, France. vol. 126.


To d'Aremberg's letter is pinned an unsigned English note,
obviously intended for Arlington's reading.


"Roux de Marsilly is still in the Bastille though they have a mind
to hang him, yet they are much puzzled what to do with him.  De
Lionne has beene to examine him twice or thrice, but there is noe
witnes to prove anything against him.  I was told by one that the
French king told it to, that in his papers they find great mention
of the Duke of Bucks: and your name, and speak as if he were much
trusted by you.  I have enquired what this Marsilly is, and I find
by one Mr. Marsilly that I am acquainted withall, and a man of
quality, that this man's name is onely Roux, and borne at Nismes
and having been formerly a soldier in his troope, ever since has
taken his name to gain more credit in Switserland where hee,
Marsilly, formerly used to bee employed by his Coll: the Mareschall
de Schomberg who invaded Switserland."


We next find a very curious letter, from which it appears that the
French Government inclined to regard Marsilly as, in fact, an agent
of Charles, but thought it wiser to trump up against him a charge
of conspiring against the life of Louis XIV.  On this charge, or
another, he was executed, while the suspicion that he was an agent
of English treachery may have been the real cause of the
determination to destroy him.  The Balthazar with whom Marsilly
left his papers is mentioned with praise by him in his paper for
Arlington, of December 27, 1668.  He is the General who should have
accompanied Marsilly to the Diet.

The substance of the letter (given in full in Note I.) is to the
following effect.  P. du Moulin (Paris, May 19/29 1669) writes to
Arlington.  Ever since, Ruvigny, the late French ambassador, a
Protestant, was in England, the French Government had been anxious
to kidnap Roux de Marsilly.  They hunted him in England, Holland,
Flanders, and Franche-Comte.  As we know from the case of Mattioli,
the Government of Louis XIV. was unscrupulously daring in breaking
the laws of nations, and seizing hostile personages in foreign
territory, as Napoleon did in the affair of the Duc d'Enghien.
When all failed Louis bade Turenne capture Roux de Marsilly
wherever he could find him.  Turenne sent officers and gentlemen
abroad, and, after four months' search they found Marsilly in
Switzerland.  They took him as he came out of the house of his
friend, General Balthazar, and carried him to Gex.  No papers were
found on him, but he asked his captors to send to Balthazar and get
"the commission he had from England," which he probably thought
would give him the security of an official diplomatic position.
Having got this document, Marsilly's captors took it to the French
Ministers.  Nothing could be more embarrassing, if this were true,
to Charles's representative in France, Montague, and to Charles's
secret negotiations, also to Arlington, who had dealt with
Marsilly.  On his part, the captive Marsilly constantly affirmed
that he was the envoy of the King of England.  The common talk of
Paris was that an agent of Charles was in the Bastille, "though at
Court they pretended to know nothing of it."  Louis was overjoyed
at Marsilly's capture, giving out that he was conspiring against
his life.  Monsieur told Montague that he need not beg for the life
of a would-be murderer like Marsilly.  But as to this idea, "they
begin now to mince it at Court," and Ruvigny assured du Moulin
"that they had no such thoughts."  De Lyonne had seen Marsilly and
observed that it was a blunder to seize him.  The French Government
was nervous, and Turenne's secretary had been "pumping" several
ambassadors as to what they thought of Marsilly's capture on
foreign territory.  One ambassador replied with spirit that a
crusade of all Europe against France, as of old against the
Moslems, would be necessary.  Would Charles, du Moulin asked, own
or disown Marsilly?

Montague's position was now awkward.  On May 23, his account of the
case was read, at Whitehall, to the Foreign Committee in London.
(See Note II. for the document.)  He did not dare to interfere in
Marsilly's behalf, because he did not know whether the man was an
agent of Charles or not.  Such are the inconveniences of a secret
royal diplomacy carried on behind the backs of Ministers.  Louis
XV. later pursued this method with awkward consequences.[1]  The
French Court, Montague said, was overjoyed at the capture of
Marsilly, and a reward of 100,000 crowns, "I am told very
privately, is set upon his head."  The French ambassador in
England, Colbert, had reported that Charles had sent Marsilly "to
draw the Swisses into the Triple League" against France.  Montague
had tried to reassure Monsieur (Charles's brother-in-law), but was
himself entirely perplexed.  As Monsieur's wife, Charles's sister,
was working with Charles for the secret treaty with Louis, the
State and family politics were clearly in a knot.  Meanwhile, the
Spanish ambassador kept pressing Montague to interfere in favor of
Marsilly.  After Montague's puzzled note had been read to the
English Foreign Committee on May 23, Arlington offered
explanations.  Marsilly came to England, he said, when Charles was
entering into negotiations for peace with Holland, and when France
seemed likely to oppose the peace.  No proposition was made to him
or by him.  Peace being made, Marsilly was given money to take him
out of the country.  He wanted the King to renew his alliance with
the Swiss cantons, but was told that the cantons must first expel
the regicides of Charles I.  He undertook to arrange this, and some
eight months later came back to England.  "He was coldly used, and
I was complained of for not using so important a man well enough."


[1] Cf. Le Secret du Roi, by the Duc de Broglie.


As we saw, Marsilly expressed the most effusive gratitude to
Arlington, which does not suggest cold usage.  Arlington told the
complainers that Marsilly was "another man's spy," what man's,
Dutch, Spanish, or even French, he does not explain.  So Charles
gave Marsilly money to go away.  He was never trusted with anything
but the expulsion of the regicides from Switzerland.  Arlington was
ordered by Charles to write a letter thanking Balthazar for his
good offices.

These explanations by Arlington do not tally with Marsilly's
communications to him, as cited at the beginning of this inquiry.
Nothing is said in these about getting the regicides of Charles I.
out of Switzerland: the paper is entirely concerned with bringing
the Protestant Cantons into anti-French League with England,
Holland, Spain, and even Sweden.  On the other hand, Arlington's
acknowledged letter to Balthazar, carried by Marsilly, may be the
"commission" of which Marsilly boasted.  In any case, on June 2,
Charles gave Colbert, the French ambassador, an audience, turning
even the Duke of York out of the room.  He then repeated to Colbert
the explanations of Arlington, already cited, and Arlington, in a
separate interview, corroborated Charles.  So Colbert wrote to
Louis (June 3, 1669); but to de Lyonne, on the same day, "I trust
that you will extract from Marsilly much matter for the King's
service.  It seemed to me that milord d'Arlington was uneasy about
it [en avait de l'inquitetude]. . . .  There is here in England one
Martin" (Eustace Dauger), "who has been that wretch's valet, and
who left him discontent."  Colbert then proposes to examine Martin,
who may know a good deal, and to send him into France.  On June 10,
Colbert writes to Louis that he expects to see Martin.[1]


[1] Bibl. Nat., Fonds. Francais, No. 10665.


On June 24, Colbert wrote to Louis about a conversation with
Charles.  It is plain that proofs of a murder-plot by Marsilly were
scanty or non-existent, though Colbert averred that Marsilly had
discussed the matter with the Spanish Ministers.  "Charles knew
that he had had much conference with Isola, the Spanish
ambassador."  Meanwhile, up to July 1, Colbert was trying to
persuade Marsilly's valet to go to France, which he declined to do,
as we have seen.  However, the luckless lad, by nods and by veiled
words, indicated that he knew a great deal.  But not by promise of
security and reward could the valet be induced to return to France.
"I might ask the King to give up Martin, the valet of Marsilly, to
me," Colbert concludes, and, by hook or by crook, he secured the
person of the wretched man, as we have seen.  In a postcript,
Colbert says that he has heard of the execution of Marsilly.

By July 19, as we saw in the previous essay, Louvois was bidding
Saint-Mars expect, at Pignerol from Dunkirk, a prisoner of the
highest political importance, to be guarded with the utmost
secrecy, yet a valet.  That valet must be Martin, now called
Eustache Dauger, and his secret can only be connected with
Marsilly.  It may have been something about Arlington's
negotiations through Marsilly, as compromising Charles II.
Arlington's explanations to the Foreign Committee were certainly
incomplete and disingenuous.  He, if not Charles, was more deeply
engaged with Marsilly than he ventured to report.  But Marsilly
himself avowed that he did not know why he was to be executed.

Executed he was, in circumstances truly hideous.  Perwich, June 5,
wrote to an unnamed correspondent in England: "They have all his
papers, which speak much of the Triple Alliance, but I know not
whether they can lawfully hang him for this, having been
naturalized in Holland, and taken in a privileged country"
(Switzerland).  Montague (Paris, June 22, 1669) writes to Arlington
that Marsilly is to die, so it has been decided, for "a rape which
he formerly committed at Nismes," and after the execution, on June
26, declares that, when broken on the wheel, Marsilly "still
persisted that he was guilty of nothing, nor did know why he was
put to death."

Like Eustache Dauger, Marsilly professed that he did not know his
own secret.  The charge of a rape, long ago, at Nismes, was
obviously trumped up to cover the real reason for the extraordinary
vindictiveness with which he was pursued, illegally taken, and
barbarously slain.  Mere Protestant restlessness on his part is
hardly an explanation.  There was clearly no evidence for the
charge of a plot to murder Louis XIV., in which Colbert, in
England, seems to have believed.  Even if the French Government
believed that he was at once an agent of Charles II., and at the
same time a would-be assassin of Louis XIV., that hardly accounts
for the intense secrecy with which his valet, Eustache Dauger, was
always surrounded.  Did Marsilly know of the Secret Treaty, and was
it from him that Arlington got his first inkling of the royal plot?
If so, Marsilly would probably have exposed the mystery in
Protestant interests.  We are entirely baffled.

In any case, Francis Vernon, writing from Paris to Williamson (?)
(June 19/25, 1669), gave a terrible account of Marsilly's death.
(For the letter, see Note V.) With a broken piece of glass (as we
learn from another source), Marsilly, in prison, wounded himself in
a ghastly manner, probably hoping to die by loss of blood.  They
seared him with a red-hot iron, and hurried on his execution.  He
was broken on the wheel, and was two hours in dying (June 22).
Contrary to usage, a Protestant preacher was brought to attend him
on the scaffold.  He came most reluctantly, expecting insult, but
not a taunt was uttered by the fanatic populace.  "He came up the
scaffold, great silence all about," Marsilly lay naked, stretched
on a St. Andrew's cross.  He had seemed half dead, his head hanging
limp, "like a drooping calf."  To greet the minister of his own
faith, he raised himself, to the surprise of all, and spoke out
loud and clear.  He utterly denied all share in a scheme to murder
Louis.  The rest may be read in the original letter (p. 51).

So perished Roux de Marsilly; the history of the master throws no
light on the secret of the servant.  That secret, for many years,
caused the keenest anxiety to Louis XIV. and Louvois.  Saint-Mars
himself must not pry into it.  Yet what could Dauger know?  That
there had been a conspiracy against the King's life?  But that was
the public talk of Paris.  If Dauger had guilty knowledge, his life
might have paid for it; why keep him a secret prisoner?  Did he
know that Charles II. had been guilty of double dealing in 1668-
1669?  Probably Charles had made some overtures to the Swiss, as a
blind to his private dealings with Louis XIV., but, even so, how
could the fact haunt Louis XIV. like a ghost?  We leave the mystery
much darker than we found it, but we see good reason why
diplomatists should have murmured of a crusade against the cruel
and brigand Government which sent soldiers to kidnap, in
neighboring states, men who did not know their own crime.

To myself it seems not improbable that the King and Louvois were
but stupidly and cruelly nervous about what Dauger MIGHT know.
Saint-Mars, when he proposed to utilize Dauger as a prison valet,
manifestly did not share the trembling anxieties of Louis XIV. and
his Minister; anxieties which grew more keen as time went on.
However, "a soldier only has his orders," and Saint-Mars executed
his orders with minute precision, taking such unheard-of
precautions that, in legend, the valet blossomed into the rightful
kind of France.



ORIGINAL PAPERS IN THE CASE OF ROUX DE MARSILLY.[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


I.  Letter of Mons. P. du Moulin to Arlington.

Paris, May ye , 1669.

My Lord,

Ever since that Monsieur de Ruvigny was in England last, and upon
the information he gave, this King had a very great desire to seize
if it were possible this Roux de Marsilly, and several persons were
sent to effect it, into England, Holland, Flanders, and Franche
Compte: amongst the rest one La Grange, exempt des Gardes, was a
good while in Holland with fifty of the guards dispersed in
severall places and quarters; But all having miscarried the King
recommended the thing to Monsieur de Turenne who sent some of his
gentlemen and officers under him to find this man out and to
endeavor to bring him alive.  These men after foure months search
found him att last in Switzerland, and having laid waite for him as
he came out from Monsr Baithazar's house (a commander well knowne)
they took him and carryed him to Gex before they could be
intercepted and he rescued.  This was done only by a warrant from
Monsieur de Turenne but as soone as they came into the french
dominions they had full powers and directions from this court for
the bringing of him hither.  Those that tooke him say they found no
papers about him, but that he desired them to write to Monsr
Balthazar to desire him to take care of his papers and to send him
the commission he had from England and a letter being written to
that effect it was signed by the prisoner and instead of sending it
as they had promised, they have brought it hither along with them.
They do all unanimously report that he did constantly affirme that
he was imployed by the King of Great Brittain and did act by his
commission; so that the general discourse here in towne is that one
of the King of England's agents is in the Bastille; though att
Court they pretend to know nothing of it and would have the world
think they are persuaded he had no relacion to his Majesty.  Your
Lordship hath heard by the publique newes how overjoyed this King
was att the bringing of this prisoner, and how farr he expressed
his thanks to the chiefe person employed in it, declaring openly
that this man had long since conspired against his life, and
agreeable to this, Monsieur, fearing that Mylord Ambr. was come to
interpose on the prisoner's behalfe asked him on Friday last att
St. Germains whether that was the cause of his coming, and told him
that he did not think he would speake for a man that attempted to
kill the King.  The same report hath been hitherto in everybody's
mouth but they begin now to mince it att court, and Monsieur de
Ruvigny would have persuaded me yesterday, they had no such
thoughts.  The truth is I am apt to believe they begin now to be
ashamed of it: and I am informed from a very good hand that
Monsieur de Lionee who hath confessed since that he can find no
ground for this pretended attempting to the King's life, and that
upon the whole he was of opinion that this man had much better been
left alone than taken, and did look upon what he had done as the
intemperancy of an ill-settled braine.  And to satisfy your
Lordship that they are nettled here, and are concerned to know what
may be the issue of all this, Monsieur de Turenne's secretary was
on Munday last sent to several foreigne Ministers to pump them and
to learne what their thoughts were concerning this violence
committed in the Dominions of a sovereign and an allye whereupon he
was told by one of them that such proceedings would bring Europe to
the necessity of entering into a Croisade against them, as formerly
against the infidels.  If I durst I would acquaint your Lordship
with the reflexions of all publique ministers here and of other
unconcerned persons in relation to his Majesty's owning or
disowning this man; but not knowing the particulars of his case,
nor the grounds his Maty may go upon, I shall forbeare entering
upon this discourse. . . .

Your Lordships' &c.

P. DU MOULIN.


II. Paper endorsed "Mr. Montague originally in Cypher.  Received
May 19, '69.  Read in foreigne Committee, 23 May.  Roux de
Marsilli."[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


I durst not venture to sollicite in Monsr Roux Marsilly's behalfe
because I doe not know whether the King my Master hath imployed him
or noe; besides he is a man as I have been tolde by many people
here of worth, that has given out that he is resolved to kill the
French king at one time or other, and I think such men are as
dangerous to one king as to another: hee is brought to the Bastille
and I believe may be proceeded against and put to death, in very
few daies.  There is great joy in this Court for his being taken,
and a hundred thousand crownes, I am told very privately, set upon
his head; the French Ambassador in England wacht him, and hee has
given the intelligence here of his being employed by the King, and
sent into Switzerland by my Master to draw the Swisses into the
Triple League.  Hee aggravates the business as much as hee can to
the prejudice of my Master to value his owne service the more, and
they seeme here to wonder that the King my Master should have
imployed or countenanced a man that had so base a design against
the King's Person, I had a great deal of discourse with Monsieur
about it, but I did positively say that he had noe relation to my
knowledge to the King my Master, and if he should have I make a
question or noe whither in this case the King will owne him.
However, my Lord, I had nothing to doe to owne or meddle in a
business that I was so much a stranger to. . . .

This Roux Marsilly is a great creature of the B. d'Isola's, wch
makes them here hate him the more.  The Spanish Resident was very
earnest with mee to have done something in behalfe of Marsilly, but
I positively refused.


III. [A paper endorsed "Roux de Marsilli.  Read in for. Committee,
23d May."][1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


Roux de Marsilly came hither when your Majesty had made a union
with Holland for making the Peace betwix the two Crownes and when
it was probable the opposition to the Peace would bee on the side
of France.

Marsilly was heard telling of longe things but noe proposition made
to him or by him.

Presently the Peace was made and Marsilly told more plainly wee had
no use of him.  A little summe of money was given him to returne as
he said whither he was to goe in Switzerland.  Upon which hee
wishing his Maty would renew his alience wth the Cantons hee was
answered his Maty would not enter into any comerce with them till
they had sent the regicides out of their Country, hee undertooke it
should bee done.  Seven or eight months after wth out any
intimation given him from hence or any expectation of him, he comes
hither, but was so coldly used I was complained off for not using
so important a man well enough.  I answered I saw noe use the King
could make of him, because he had no credit in Switzerlande and for
any thing else I thought him worth nothing to us, but above all
because I knew by many circumstances HEE WAS ANOTHER MAN'S SPY and
soe ought not to be paid by his Majesty.  Notwithstanding this his
Maty being moved from compassion commanded hee should have some
money given him to carry him away and that I should write to
Monsieur Balthazar thanking him in the King's name for the good
offices hee rendered in advancing a good understanding betwixt his
Maty and the Cantons and desiring him to continue them in all
occasions.

The man was always looked upon as a hot headed and indiscreete man,
and soe accordingly handled, hearing him, but never trusting him
with anything but his own offered and undesired endeavours to gett
the Regicides sent out of Switzerland.


IV. Letter of W. Perwich to ----.[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


Paris: June 5, 1669.

Honored Sir,

Roux Marsilly has prudently declared hee had some what of
importance to say but it should bee to the King himselfe wch may be
means of respiting his processe and as he hopes intercession may
bee made for him; but people talk so variously of him that I cannot
tell whether hee ought to bee owned by any Prince; the Suisses have
indeed the greatest ground to reclayme him as being taken in
theirs.  They have all his papers which speake much of the Triple
Alliance; if they have no other pretext of hanging him I know not
whether they can lawfully for this, hee having been naturallised in
Holland and taken in a priviledged Country. . . .


V.  Francis Vernon to [Mr. Williamson?].[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol. 126.


Paris: June 19/25, 1669.

Honored Sir,

My last of the 26th Currt was soe short and soe abrupt that I fear
you can peck butt little satisfaction out of it.

I did intend to have written something about Marsilly but that I
had noe time then.  In my letter to my Lord Arlington I writt that
Friday 21 Currt hee wounded himself wch he did not because hee was
confronted with Ruvigny as the Gazettes speake.  For he knew before
hee should dye, butt he thought by dismembering himself that the
losse of blood would carry him out of the world before it should
come to bee knowne that he had wounded himselfe.  And when the
Governor of the Bastille spied the blood hee said It was a stone
was come from him which caused that effusion.  However the governor
mistrusted the worst and searcht him to see what wound he had made.
So they seared him and sent word to St. Germaines which made his
execution be hastened.  Saturday about 1 of the clock he was
brought on the skaffold before the Chastelet and tied to St.
Andrew's Crosse all wch while he acted the Dying man and scarce
stirred, and seemed almost breathless and fainting.  The Lieutenant
General prest him to confesse and there was a doctor of the Sorbon
who was a counsellr of the Castelet there likewise to exhort him to
disburthen his mind of any thing which might be upon it.  Butt he
seemed to take no notice and lay panting.

Then the Lieutenant Criminel bethought himself that the only way to
make him speake would bee to sende for a ministre soe hee did to
Monsr Daillie but hee because the Edicts don't permitt ministres to
come to condemned persons in publique but only to comfort them in
private before they goe out of prison refused to come till hee sent
a huissier who if he had refused the second time would have brought
him by force.  At this second summons hee came butt not without
great expectations to bee affronted in a most notorious manner
beeing the first time a ministre came to appeare on a scaffold and
that upon soe sinister an occasion.  Yet when he came found a great
presse of people.  All made way, none lett fall soe much as a
taunting word.  Hee came up the Scaffold, great silence all about.
Hee found him lying bound stretched on St. Andrew's Crosse naked
ready for execution.  Hee told him hee was sent for to exhort him
to die patiently and like a Christian.  Then immediately they were
all surprized to see him hold up his head wch he lett hang on one
side before like a drooping calfe and speake as loud and clear as
the ministre, to whom he said with a cheerful air hee was glad to
see him, that hee need not question butt that hee would dye like a
Christian and patiently too.  Then hee went and spoke some places
of Scripture to encourage him which he heard with great attention.
They afterward came to mention some things to move him to
contrition, and there hee tooke an occasion to aggravate the
horrour of a Crime of attempting against the King's person.  Hee
said hee did not know what hee meant.  For his part hee never had
any evill intention against the Person of the King.

The Lieutenant Criminel stood all the while behind Monsieur Daillie
and hearkened to all and prompted Monsr Daillie to aske him if hee
had said there were 10 Ravillacs besides wch would doe the King's
businesse.  Hee protested solemnly hee never said any such words or
if hee did hee never remembered, butt if hee had it was with no
intention of Malice.  Then Monsieur Daillie turned to the people
and made a discourse in vindication of those of the Religion that
it was no Principle of theirs attempts on the persons of King[s]
butt only loyalty and obedience.  This ended hee went away; hee
staid about an hour in all, and immediately as soon as he was gone,
they went to their worke and gave him eleven blows with a barre and
laid him on the wheele.  He was two houres dying.  All about Monsr
Daillie I heard from his own mouth for I went to wait on him
because it was reported hee had said something concerning the King
of England butt hee could tell mee nothing of that.  There was a
flying report that he should say going from the Chastelet--The Duke
of York hath done mee a great injury.  The Swisses they say
resented his [Marsilly's] taking and misst but 1/2 an hour to take
them which betrayed him [the monk] after whom they sent.  When he
was on the wheele he was heard to say Le Roy est grand tyrant, Le
Roy me traitte d'un facon fort barbare.  All that you read
concerning oaths and dying en enrage is false all the oaths hee
used being only asseverations to Monsr Daillie that he was falsely
accused as to the King's person

Sr I am &c

FRANS. VERNON.



VI.  The Ambassador Montague to Arlington.[1]


[1] State Papers, France, vol.  126.


Paris: June 22, 1669.

My Lord,

The Lieutenant criminel hath proceeded pretty farre with Le Roux
Marsilly.  The crime they forme their processe on beeing a rape
which he had formerly committed at Nismes soe that he perceiving
but little hopes of his life, sent word to the King if hee would
pardon him he could reveale things to him which would concerne him
more and be of greater consequence to him, than his destruction.



VII.  The same to the same.

Paris: June 26, '69.

My Lord,

I heard that Marsilly was to be broke on the wheel and I gave order
then to one of my servants to write Mr. Williamson word of it, soe
I suppose you have heard of it already: they hastened his execution
for feare he should have dyed of the hurt he had done himself the
day before; they sent for a minister to him when he was upon the
scaffold to see if he would confesse anything, but he still
persisted that he was guilty of nothing nor did not know why he was
put to death. . . .



PART II--True Stories of Modern Magic


M. Robert-Houdin


A Conjurer's Confessions

I

SELF-TRAINING


[Sleight-of-hand theories alone cannot explain the mysteries of
"magic" as practiced by that eminent Frenchman who revolutionized
the entire art, and who was finally called upon to help his
government out of a difficuity--Robert-Houdin.  The success of his
most famous performances hung not only on an incredible dexterity,
but also on high ingenuity and moral courage, as the following
pages from his "Memoirs" will prove to the reader.  The story
begins when the young man of twenty was laboring patiently as
apprentice to a watchmaker.]


In order to aid my progress and afford me relaxation, my master
recommended me to study some treatises on mechanics in general, and
on clockmaking in particular.  As this suited my taste exactly, I
gladly assented, and I was devoting myself passionately to this
attractive study, when a circumstance, apparently most simple,
suddenly decided my future life by revealing to me a vocation whose
mysterious resources must open a vast field for my inventive and
fanciful ideas.

One evening I went into a bookseller's shop to buy Berthoud's
"Treatise on Clockmaking," which I knew he had.  The tradesman
being engaged at the moment on matters more important, took down
two volumes from the shelves and handed them to me without
ceremony.  On returning home I sat down to peruse my treatise
conscientiously, but judge of my surprise when I read on the back
of one of the volumes "SCIENTIFIC AMUSEMENTS."  Astonished at
finding such a title on a professional work, I opened it
impatiently, and, on running through the table of contents, my
surprise was doubled on reading these strange phrases:

The way of performing tricks with the cards--How to guess a
person's thoughts--To cut off a pigeon's head, to restore it to
life, etc., etc.

The bookseller had made a mistake.  In his haste, he had given me
two volumes of the Encyclopaedia instead of Berthoud.  Fascinated,
however, by the announcement of such marvels, I devoured the
mysterious pages, and the further my reading advanced, the more I
saw laid bare before me the secrets of an art for which I was
unconsciously predestined.

I fear I shall be accused of exaggeration, or at least not be
understood by many of my readers, when I say that this discovery
caused me the greatest joy I had ever experienced.  At this moment
a secret presentiment warned me that success, perhaps glory, would
one day accrue to me in the apparent realization of the marvelous
and impossible, and fortunately these presentiments did not err.

The resemblance between two books, and the hurry of a bookseller,
were the commonplace causes of the most important event in my life.

It may be urged that different circumstances might have suggested
this profession to me at a later date.  It is probable; but then I
should have had no time for it.  Would any workman, artisan, or
tradesman give up a certainty, however slight it may be, to yield
to a passion which would be surely regarded as a mania?  Hence my
irresistible penchant for the mysterious could only be followed at
this precise period of my life.

How often since have I blessed this providential error, without
which I should have probably vegetated as a country watchmaker!  My
life would have been spent in gentle monotony; I should have been
spared many sufferings, emotions, and shocks: but, on the other
hand, what lively sensations, what profound delight would have been
sacrificed!

I was eagerly devouring every line of the magic book which
described the astounding tricks; my head was aglow, and I at times
gave way to thoughts which plunged me in ecstasy.

The author gave a very plain explanation of his tricks; still, he
committed the error of supposing his readers possessed of the
necessary skill to perform them.  Now, I was entirely deficient in
this skill, and though most desirous of acquiring it, I found
nothing in the book to indicate the means.  I was in the position
of a man who attempts to copy a picture without possessing the
slightest notion of drawing and painting.

In the absence of a professor to instruct me, I was compelled to
create the principles of the science I wished to study.  In the
first place, I recognized the fundamental principle of sleight-of-
hand, that the organs performing the principal part are the sight
and touch.  I saw that, in order to attain any degree of
perfection, the professor must develop these organs to their
fullest extent--for, in his exhibitions, he must be able to see
everything that takes place around him at half a glance, and
execute his deceptions with unfailing dexterity.

I had been often struck by the ease with which pianists can read
and perform at sight the most difficult pieces.  I saw that, by
practice, it would be possible to create a certainty of perception
and facility of touch, rendering it easy for the artist to attend
to several things simultaneously, while his hands were busy
employed with some complicated task.  This faculty I wished to
acquire and apply to sleight-of-hand; still, as music could not
afford me the necessary elements, I had recourse to the juggler's
art, in which I hoped to meet with an analogous result.

It is well known that the trick with the balls wonderfully improves
the touch, but does it not improve the vision at the same time?  In
fact, when a juggler throws into the air four balls crossing each
other in various directions, he requires an extraordinary power of
sight to follow the direction his hands have given to each of the
balls.  At this period a corn-cutter resided at Blois, who
possessed the double talent of juggling and extracting corns with a
skill worthy of the lightness of his hands.  Still, with both these
qualities, he was not rich, and being aware of that fact, I hoped
to obtain lessons from him at a price suited to my modest finances.
In fact, for ten francs he agreed to initiate me in the juggling
art.

I practiced with so much zeal, and progressed so rapidly, that in
less than a month I had nothing more to learn; at least, I knew as
much as my master, with the exception of corn-cutting, the monopoly
in which I left him.  I was able to juggle with four balls at once.
But this did not satisfy my ambition; so I placed a book before me,
and, while the balls were in the air, I accustomed myself to read
without any hesitation.

This will probably seem to my readers very extraordinary; but I
shall surprise them still more, when I say that I have just amused
myself by repeating this curious experiment.  Though thirty years
have elapsed since the time of which I am writing, and though I
scarcely once touched the balls during that period, I can still
manage to read with ease while keeping three balls up.

The practice of this trick gave my fingers a remarkable degree of
delicacy and certainty, while my eye was at the same time acquiring
a promptitude of perception that was quite marvelous.  Presently I
shall have to speak of the service this rendered me in my
experiment of second sight.  After having thus made my hands supple
and docile, I went on straight to sleight-of-hand, and I more
especially devoted myself to the manipulation of cards and
palmistry.

This operation requires a great deal of practice; for, while the
hand is held apparently open, balls, corks, lumps of sugar, coins,
etc., must be held unseen, the fingers remaining perfectly free and
limber.

Owing to the little time at my disposal, the difficulties connected
with these new experiments would have been insurmountable had I not
found a mode of practicing without neglecting my business.  It was
the fashion in those days to wear coats with large pockets on the
hips, called a la proprietaire, so whenever my hands were not
otherwise engaged they slipped naturally into my pockets, and set
to work with cards, coins, or one of the objects I have mentioned.
It will be easily understood how much time I gained by this.  Thus,
for instance, when out on errands my hands could be at work on both
sides; at dinner, I often ate my soup with one hand while I was
learning to sauter la coupe with the other--in short, the slightest
moment of relaxation was devoted to my favorite pursuit.


II

"SECOND SIGHT"


[A thousand more trials of patience and perseverance finally
brought to the conjurer a Parisian theater and an appreciative
clientele.  But he never ceased to labor and improve the quality of
his marvelous effects.]


The experiment, however, to which I owed my reputation was one
inspired by that fantastic god to whom Pascal attributes all the
discoveries of this sublunary world: it was chance that led me
straight to the invention of SECOND SIGHT.

My two children were playing one day in the drawing-room at a game
they had invented for their own amusement.  The younger had
bandaged his elder brother's eyes, and made him guess the objects
he touched, and when the latter happened to guess right, they
changed places.  This simple game suggested to me the most
complicated idea that ever crossed my mind.

Pursued by the notion, I ran and shut myself up in my workroom, and
was fortunately in that happy state when the mind follows easily
the combinations traced by fancy.  I rested my hand in my hands,
and, in my excitement, laid down the first principles of second
sight.

My readers will remember the experiment suggested to me formerly by
the pianist's dexterity, and the strange faculty I succeeded in
attaining: I could read while juggling with four balls.  Thinking
seriously of this, I fancied that this "perception by appreciation"
might be susceptible of equal development, if I applied its
principles to the memory and the mind.

I resolved, therefore, on making some experiments with my son
Emile, and, in order to make my young assistant understand the
nature of the exercise we were going to learn, I took a domino, the
cinq-quatre for instance, and laid it before him.  Instead of
letting him count the points of the two numbers, I requested the
boy to tell me the total at once.

"Nine," he said.

Then I added another domino, the quarter-tray.

"That makes sixteen," he said, without any hesitation.  I stopped
the first lesson here; the next day we succeeded in counting at a
single glance four dominoes, the day after six, and thus we at
length were enabled to give instantaneously the product of a dozen
dominoes.

This result obtained, we applied ourselves to a far more difficult
task, over which we spent a month.  My son and I passed rapidly
before a toy-shop, or any other displaying a variety of wares, and
cast an attentive glance upon it.  A few steps farther on we drew
paper and pencil from our pockets, and tried which could describe
the greater number of objects seen in passing.  I must own that my
son reached a perfection far greater than mine, for he could often
write down forty objects, while I could scarce reach thirty.  Often
feeling vexed at this defeat, I would return to the shop and verify
his statement, but he rarely made a mistake.

My male readers will certainly understand the possibility of this,
but they will recognize the difficulty.  As for my lady readers, I
am convinced beforehand they will not be of the same opinion, for
they daily perform far more astounding feats.  Thus, for instance,
I can safely assert that a lady seeing another pass at full speed
in a carriage, will have had time to analyze her toilet from her
bonnet to her shoes, and be able to describe not only the fashion
and quality of the stuffs, but also say if the lace be real or only
machine-made.  I have known ladies do this.

This natural, or acquired, faculty among ladies, but which my son
and I had only gained by constant practice, was of great service in
my performances, for while I was executing my tricks, I could see
everything that passed around me, and thus prepare to foil any
difficulties presented me.  This exercise had given me, so to
speak, the power of following two ideas simultaneously, and nothing
is more favorable in conjuring than to be able to think at the same
time both of what you are saying and of what you are doing.  I
eventually acquired such a knack in this that I frequently invented
new tricks while going through my performances.  One day, even, I
made a bet I would solve a problem in mechanics while taking my
part in conversation.  We were talking of the pleasure of a country
life, and I calculated during this time the quantity of wheels and
pinions, as well as the necessary cogs, to produce certain
revolutions required, without once failing in my reply.

This slight explanation will be sufficient to show what is the
essential basis of second sight, and I will add that a secret and
unnoticeable correspondence[1] existed between my son and myself,
by which I could announce to him the name, nature, and bulk of
objects handed me by spectators.


[1] "Telegraphy."


As none understood my mode of action, they were tempted to believe
in something extraordinary, and, indeed, my son Emile, then aged
twelve, possessed all the essential qualities to produce this
opinion, for his pale, intellectual, and ever thoughtful face
represented the type of a boy gifted with some supernatural power.

Two months were incessantly employed in erecting the scaffolding of
our tricks, and when we were quite confident of being able to
contend against the difficulties of such an undertaking, we
announced the first representation of second sight.  On the 12th of
February, 1846, I printed in the center of my bill the following
singular announcement:

"In this performance M. Robert-Houdin's son, who is gifted with a
marvelous second sight, after his eyes have been covered with a
thick bandage, will designate every object presented to him by the
audience."

I cannot say whether this announcement attracted any spectators,
for my room was constantly crowded, still I may affirm, what may
seem very extraordinary, that the experiment of second sight, which
afterwards became so fashionable, produced no effect on the first
performance.  I am inclined to believe that the spectators fancied
themselves the dupes of accomplices, but I was much annoyed by the
result, as I had built on the surprise I should produce; still,
having no reason to doubt its ultimate success, I was tempted to
make a second trial, which turned out well.

The next evening I noticed in my room several persons who had been
present on the previous night, and I felt they had come a second
time to assure themselves of the reality of the experiment.  It
seems they were convinced, for my success was complete, and amply
compensated for my former disappointment.

I especially remember a mark of singular approval with which one of
my pit audience favored me.  My son had named to him several
objects he offered in succession; but not feeling satisfied, my
incredulous friend, rising, as if to give more importance to the
difficulty he was about to present, handed me an instrument
peculiar to cloth merchants, and employed to count the number of
threads.  Acquiescing in his wish, I said to my boy, "What do I
hold in my hand?"

"It is an instrument to judge the fineness of cloth, and called a
thread counter."

"By Jove!" my spectator said, energetically, "it is marvelous.  If
I had paid ten francs to see it, I should not begrudge them."

From this moment my room was much too small, and was crowded every
evening.

Still, success is not entirely rose-colored, and I could easily
narrate many disagreeable scenes produced by the reputation I had
of being a sorcerer; but I will only mention one, which forms a
resume of all I pass over:

A young lady of elegant manners paid me a visit one day, and
although her face was hidden by a thick veil, my practiced eyes
perfectly distinguished her features.  She was very pretty.

My incognita would not consent to sit down till she was assured we
were alone, and that I was the real Robert-Houdin.  I also seated
myself, and assuming the attitude of a man prepared to listen, I
bent slightly to my visitor, as if awaiting her pleasure to explain
to me the object of her mysterious visit.  To my great surprise,
the young lady, whose manner betrayed extreme emotion, maintained
the most profound silence, and I began to find the visit very
strange, and was on the point of forcing an explanation, at any
hazard, when the fair unknown timidly ventured these words:

"Good Heavens! sir, I know not how you will interpret my visit."

Here she stopped, and let her eyes sink with a very embarrassed
air; then, making a violent effort, she continued:

"What I have to ask of you, sir, is very difficult to explain."

"Speak, madam, I beg," I said, politely, "and I will try to guess
what you cannot explain to me."

And I began asking myself what this reserve meant.

"In the first place," the young lady said, in a low voice, and
looking round her, "I must tell you confidentially that I loved, my
love was returned, and I--I am betrayed."

At the last word the lady raised her head, overcame the timidity
she felt, and said, in a firm and assured voice:

"Yes, sir--yes, I am betrayed, and for that reason I have come to
you."

"Really, madam," I said, much surprised at this strange confession,
"I do not see how I can help you in such a matter."

"Oh, sir, I entreat you," said my fair visitor, clasping her hands--
"I implore you not to abandon me!"

I had great difficulty in keeping my countenance, and yet I felt an
extreme curiosity to know the history concealed behind this
mystery.

"Calm yourself, madam," I remarked, in a tone of tender sympathy;
"tell me what you would of me, and if it be in my power--"

"If it be in your power!" the young lady said, quickly; "why,
nothing is more easy, sir."

"Explain yourself, madam."

"Well, sir, I wish to be avenged."

"In what way?"

"How, you know better than I, sir; must I teach you?  You have in
your power means to--"

"I, madam?"

"Yes, sir, you! for you are a sorcerer, and cannot deny it."

At this word sorcerer, I was much inclined to laugh; but I was
restrained by the incognita's evident emotion.  Still, wishing to
put an end to a scene which was growing ridiculous, I said, in a
politely ironical tone:

"Unfortunately, madam, you give me a title I never possessed."

"How, sir!" the young woman exclaimed, in a quick tone, "you will
not allow you are--"

"A sorcerer, madam?  Oh, no, I will not."

"You will not?"

"No, a thousand times no, madam."

At these words my visitor rose hastily, muttered a few incoherent
words, appeared suffering from terrible emotion, and then drawing
near me with flaming eyes and passionate gestures, repeated:

"Ah, you will not!  Very good; I now know what I have to do."

Stupefied by such an outbreak, I looked at her fixedly, and began
to suspect the cause of her extraordinary conduct.

"There are two modes of acting," she said, with terrible
volubility, "toward people who devote themselves to magic arts--
entreaty and menaces.  You would not yield to the first of these
means, hence, I must employ the second.  Stay," she added, "perhaps
this will induce you to speak."

And, lifting up her cloak, she laid her hand on the hilt of a
dagger passed through her girdle.  At the same time she suddenly
threw back her veil, and displayed features in which all the signs
of rage and madness could be traced.  No longer having a doubt as
to the person I had to deal with, my first movement was to rise and
stand on my guard; but this first feeling overcome, I repented the
thought of a struggle with the unhappy woman, and determined on
employing a method almost always successful with those deprived of
reason.  I pretended to accede to her wishes.

"If it be so, madam, I yield to your request.  Tell me what you
require."

"I have told you, sir; I wish for vengeance, and there is only one
method to--"

Here there was a fresh interruption, and the young lady, calmed by
my apparent submission, as well as embarrassed by the request she
had to make of me, became again timid and confused.

"Well, madam?"

"Well, sir, I know not how to tell you--how to explain to you--but
I fancy there are certain means--certain spells--which render it
impossible--impossible for a man to be--unfaithful."

"I now understand what you wish, madam.  It is a certain magic
practice employed in the middle ages.  Nothing is easier, and I
will satisfy you."

Decided on playing the farce to the end, I took down the largest
book I could find in my library, turned over the leaves, stopped at
a page which I pretended to scan with profound attention, and then
addressing the lady, who followed all my movements anxiously,

"Madam," I said confidentially, "the spell I am going to perform
renders it necessary for me to know the name of the person; have
the kindness, then, to tell it me."

"Julian!" she said, in a faint voice.

With all the gravity of a real sorcerer, I solemnly thrust a pin
through a lighted candle, and pronounced some cabalistic words.
After which, blowing out the candle, and turning to the poor
creature, I said:

"Madam, it is done; your wish is accomplished."

"Oh, thank you, sir," she replied, with the expression of the
profoundest gratitude; and at the same moment she laid a purse on
the table and rushed away.  I ordered my servant to follow her to
her house, and obtain all the information he could about her, and I
learned she had been a widow for a short time, and that the loss of
an adored husband had disturbed her reason.  The next day I visited
her relatives, and, returning them the purse, I told them the scene
the details of which the reader has just perused.

This scene, with some others that preceded and followed it,
compelled me to take measures to guard myself against bores of
every description.  I could not dream, as formerly, of exiling
myself in the country, but I employed a similar resource: this was
to shut myself up in my workroom, and organize around me a system
of defense against those whom I called, in my ill-temper, thieves
of time.

I daily received visits from persons who were utter strangers to
me; some were worth knowing, but the majority, gaining an
introduction under the most futile pretexts, only came to kill a
portion of their leisure time with me.  It was necessary to
distinguish the tares from the wheat, and this is the arrangement I
made:

When one of these gentlemen rang at my door, an electric
communication struck a bell in my workroom; I was thus warned and
put on my guard.  My servant opened the door, and, as is customary,
inquired the visitor's name, while I, for my part, laid my ear to a
tube, arranged for the purpose, which conveyed to me every word.
If, according to his reply, I thought it as well not to receive
him, I pressed a button, and a white mark that appeared in a
certain part of the hall announced I was not at home to him.  My
servant then stated I was out, and begged the visitor to apply to
the manager.

Sometimes it happened that I erred in my judgment, and regretted
having granted an audience; but I had another mode of shortening a
bore's visit.  I had placed behind the sofa on which I sat an
electric spring, communicating with a bell my servant could hear.
In case of need, and while talking, I threw my arm carelessly over
the back of the sofa, touching the spring, and the bell rang.  Then
my servant, playing a little farce, opened the front door, rang the
bell, which could be heard from the room where I sat, and came to
tell me that M. X--- (a name invented for the occasion) wished to
speak to me.  I ordered M. X--- to be shown into an adjoining room,
and it was very rare that my bore did not raise the siege.  No one
can form an idea how much time I gained by this happy arrangement,
or how many times I blessed my imagination and the celebrated
savant to whom the discovery of galvanism is due!

This feeling can be easily explained, for my time was of
inestimable value.  I husbanded it like a treasure, and never
sacrificed it, unless the sacrifice might help me to discover new
experiments destined to stimulate public curiosity.

To support my determination in making my researches, I had ever
before me this maxim:

IT IS MORE DIFFICULT TO SUPPORT ADMIRATION THAN TO EXCITE IT.

And this other, an apparent corollary of the preceding:

THE FASHION AN ARTIST ENJOYS CAN ONLY LAST AS HIS TALENT DAILY
INCREASES.

Nothing increases a professional man's merit so much as the
possession of an independent fortune; this truth may be coarse, but
it is indubitable.  Not only was I convinced of these principles of
high economy, but I also knew that a man must strive to profit by
the fickle favor of the public, which equally descends if it does
not rise.  Hence I worked my reputation as much as I could.  In
spite of my numerous engagements, I found means to give
performances in all the principal theaters, though great
difficulties frequently arose, as my performance did not end till
half-past ten, and I could only fulfill my other engagements after
that hour.

Eleven o'clock was generally the hour fixed for my appearance on a
strange stage, and my readers may judge of the speed required to
proceed to the theater in so short a time and make my preparations.
It is true that the moments were as well counted as employed, and
my curtain had hardly fallen than, rushing toward the stairs, I got
before my audience, and jumped into a vehicle that bore me off at
full speed.

But this fatigue was as nothing compared to the emotion
occasionally produced by an error in the time that was to elapse
between my two performances.  I remember that, one night, having to
wind up the performances at the Vaudeville, the stage manager
miscalculated the time the pieces would take in performing, and
found himself much in advance.  He sent off an express to warn me
that the curtain had fallen, and I was anxiously expected.  Can my
readers comprehend my wretchedness?  My experiments, of which I
could omit none, would occupy another quarter of an hour; but
instead of indulging in useless recriminations, I resigned myself
and continued my performance, though I was a prey to frightful
anxiety.  While speaking, I fancied I could hear that cadenced yell
of the public to which the famous song, "Des lampions, des
lampions," was set.  Thus, either through preoccupation or a desire
to end sooner, I found when my performance was over I had gained
five minutes out of the quarter of an hour.  Assuredly, it might he
called the quarter of an hour's grace.

To jump into a carriage and drive to the Place de la Bourse was the
affair of an instant; still, twenty minutes had elapsed since the
curtain fell, and that was an enormous time.  My son Emile and I
proceeded up the actors' stairs at full speed, but on the first
step we had heard the cries, whistling, and stamping of the
impatient audience.  What a prospect!  I knew that frequently,
either right or wrong, the public treated an artiste, no matter
whom, very harshly, to remind him of punctuality.  That sovereign
always appears to have on its lips the words of another monarch: "I
was obliged to wait."  However, we hurried up the steps leading to
the stage.

The stage manager, who had been watching, on hearing our hurried
steps, cried from the landing:

"Is that you, M. Houdin?"

"Yes, sir--yes."

"Raise the curtain!" the same voice shouted.

"Wait, wait, it is imp--"

My breath would not allow me to finish my objection; I fell on a
chair, unable to move.

"Come, M. Houdin," the manager said, "DO go on the stage, the
curtain is up, and the public are so impatient."

The door at the back of the stage was open, but I could not pass
through it; fatigue and emotion nailed me to the spot.  Still, an
idea occurred to me, which saved me from the popular wrath.

"Go on to the stage, my boy," I said to my son, "and prepare all
that is wanting for the second-sight trick."

The public allowed themselves to be disarmed by this youth, whose
face inspired a sympathizing interest; and my son, after gravely
bowing to the audience, quietly made his slight preparations, that
is to say, he carried an ottoman to the front of the stage, and
placed on a neighboring table a slate, some chalk, a pack of cards,
and a bandage.

This slight delay enabled me to recover my breath and calm my
nerves, and I advanced in my turn with an attempt to assume the
stereotyped smile, in which I signally failed, as I was so
agitated.  The audience at first remained silent, then their faces
gradually unwrinkled, and soon, one or two claps having been
ventured, they were carried away and peace was made.  I was well
rewarded, however, for this terrible ordeal, as my "second-sight"
never gained a more brilliant triumph.

An incident greatly enlivened the termination of my performance.

A spectator, who had evidently come on purpose to embarrass us, had
tried in vain for some minutes to baffle my son's clairvoyance,
when, turning to me, he said, laying marked stress on his words:

"As your son is a soothsayer, of course he can guess the number of
my stall?"

The importunate spectator doubtless hoped to force us into a
confession of our impotence, for he covered his number, and the
adjacent seats being occupied, it was apparently impossible to read
the numbers.  But I was on my guard against all surprises, and my
reply was ready.  Still, in order to profit as much as possible by
the situation, I feigned to draw back.

"You know, sir," I said, feigning an embarrassed air, "that my son
is neither sorcerer nor diviner; he reads through my eyes, and
hence I have given this experiment the name of second sight.  As I
cannot see the number of your stall, and the seats close to you are
occupied, my son cannot tell it you."

"Ah! I was certain of it," my persecutor said, in triumph, and
turning to his neighbors: "I told you I would pin him."

"Oh, sir! you are not generous in your victory," I said, in my
turn, in a tone of mockery.  "Take care; if you pique my son's
vanity too sharply, he may solve your problem, though it is so
difficult."

"I defy him," said the spectator, leaning firmly against the back
of his seat, to hide the number better--"yes, yes--I defy him!"

"You believe it to be difficult, then?"

"I will grant more: it is impossible."

"Well, then, sir, that is a stronger reason for us to try it.  You
will not be angry if we triumph in our turn?" I added, with a
petulant smile.

"Come, sir; we understand evasions of that sort.  I repeat it--I
challenge you both."

The public found great amusement in this debate, and patiently
awaited its issue.

"Emile," I said to my son, "prove to this gentleman that nothing
can escape your second sight."

"It is number sixty-nine," the boy answered, immediately.

Noisy and hearty applause rose from every part of the theater, in
which our opponent joined, for, confessing his defeat, he
exclaimed, as he clapped his hands, "It is astounding--
magnificent!"

The way I succeeded in finding out the number of the stall was
this: I knew beforehand that in all theaters where the stalls are
divided down the center by a passage, the uneven numbers are on the
right, and the even on the left.  As at the Vaudeville each row was
composed of ten stalls, it followed that on the right hand the
several rows must begin with one, twenty-one, forty-one, and so on,
increasing by twenty each.  Guided by this, I had no difficulty in
discovering that my opponent was seated in number sixty-nine,
representing the fifth stall in the fourth row.  I had prolonged
the conversation for the double purpose of giving more brilliancy
to my experiment, and gaining time to make my researches.  Thus I
applied my process of two simultaneous thoughts, to which I have
already alluded.

As I am now explaining matters, I may as well tell my readers some
of the artifices that added material brilliancy to the second
sight.  I have already said this experiment was the result of a
material communication between myself and my son which no one could
detect.  Its combinations enabled us to describe any conceivable
object; but, though this was a splendid result, I saw that I should
soon encounter unheard-of difficulties in executing it.

The experiment of second sight always formed the termination of my
performance.  Each evening I saw unbelievers arrive with all sorts
of articles to triumph over a secret which they could not unravel.
Before going to see Robert-Houdin's son a council was held, in
which an object that must embarrass the father was chosen.  Among
these were half-effaced antique medals, minerals, books printed in
characters of every description (living and dead languages), coats-
of-arms, microscopic objects, etc.

But what caused me the greatest difficulty was in finding out the
contents of parcels, often tied with a string, or even sealed up.
But I had managed to contend successfully against all these
attempts to embarrass me.  I opened boxes, purses, pocketbooks,
etc., with great ease, and unnoticed, while appearing to be engaged
on something quite different.  Were a sealed parcel offered me, I
cut a small slit in the paper with the nail of my left thumb, which
I always purposely kept very long and sharp, and thus discovered
what it contained.  One essential condition was excellent sight,
and that I possessed to perfection.  I owed it originally to my old
trade, and practice daily improved it.  An equally indispensable
necessity was to know the name of every object offered me.  It was
not enough to say, for instance, "It is a coin"; but my son must
give its technical name, its value, the country in which it was
current, and the year in which it was struck.  Thus, for instance,
if an English crown were handed me, my son was expected to state
that it was struck in the reign of George IV, and had an intrinsic
value of six francs eighteen centimes.

Aided by an excellent memory, we had managed to classify in our
heads the name and value of all foreign money.  We could also
describe a coat-of-arms in heraldic terms.  Thus, on the arms of
the house of X--- being handed me, my son would reply: "Field
gules, with two croziers argent in pale."  This knowledge was very
useful to us in the salons of the Faubourg Saint Germain, where we
were frequently summoned.

I had also learned the characters--though unable to translate a
word--of an infinity of languages, such as Chinese, Russian,
Turkish Greek, Hebrew, etc.  We knew, too, the names of all
surgical instruments, so that a surgical pocketbook, however
complicated it might be, could not embarrass us.  Lastly, I had a
very sufficient knowledge of mineralogy, precious stones,
antiquities, and curiosities; but I had at my command every
possible resource for acquiring these studies, as one of my dearest
and best friends, Aristide le Carpentier, a learned antiquary, and
uncle of the talented composer of the same name, had, and still
has, a cabinet of antique curiosities, which makes the keepers of
the imperial museums fierce with envy.  My son and I spent many
long days in learning here names and dates of which we afterwards
made a learned display.  Le Carpentier taught me many things, and,
among others, he described various signs by which to recognize old
coins when the die is worn off.  Thus, a Trajan, a Tiberius, or a
Marcus Aurelius became as familiar to me as a five-franc piece.

Owing to my old trade, I could open a watch with ease, and do it
with one hand, so as to be able to read the maker's name without
the public suspecting it: then I shut up the watch again and the
trick was ready; my son managed the rest of the business.

But that power of memory which my son possessed in an eminent
degree certainly did us the greatest service.  When we went to
private houses, he needed only a very rapid inspection in order to
know all the objects in a room, as well as the various ornaments
worn by the spectators, such as chatelaines, pins, eyeglasses,
fans, brooches, rings, bouquets, etc.  He thus could describe these
objects with the greatest ease, when I pointed them out to him by
our secret communication.  Here is an instance:

One evening, at a house in the Chaussee d'Antin, and at the end of
a performance which had been as successful as it was loudly
applauded, I remembered that, while passing through the next room
to the one we were now in, I had begged my son to cast a glance at
a library and remember the titles of some of the books, as well as
the order they were arranged in.  No one had noticed this rapid
examination.

"To end the second-sight experiment, sir," I said to the master of
the house, "I will prove to you that my son can read through a
wall.  Will you lend me a book?"

I was naturally conducted to the library in question, which I
pretended now to see for the first time, and I laid my finger on a
book.

"Emile," I said to my son, "what is the name of this work?"

"It is Buffon," he replied quickly.

"And the one by its side?" an incredulous spectator hastened to
ask.

"On the right or left?" my son asked.

"On the right," the speaker said, having a good reason for choosing
this book, for the lettering was very small.

"The Travels of Anacharsis the Younger," the boy replied.  "But,"
he added, "had you asked the name of the book on the left, sir, I
should have said Lamartine's Poetry.  A little to the right of this
row, I see Crebillon's works; below, two volumes of Fleury's
Memoirs"; and my son thus named a dozen books before he stopped.

The spectators had not said a word during this description, as they
felt so amazed; but when the experiment had ended, all complimented
us by clapping their hands.


III

THE MAGICIAN WHO BECAME AN AMBASSADOR


[It is not generally known that Robert-Houdin once rendered his
country an important service as special envoy to Algeria.  Half a
century ago this colony was an endless source of trouble to France.
Although the rebel Arab chieftain Abd-del-Kader had surrendered in
1847, an irregular warfare was kept up against the French authority
by the native Kabyles, stimulated by their Mohammedan priests, and
particularly through so-called "miracles," such as recovery from
wounds and burns self-inflicted by the Marabouts and other fanatic
devotees of the Prophet.

Thus in 1856 the hopes of the French Foreign Office rested on
Robert-Houdin.  He was requested to exhibit his tricks in the most
impressive form possible, with the idea of proving to the deluded
Arabs that they had been in error in ascribing supernatural powers
to their holy men.]


It was settled that I should reach Algiers by the next 27th of
September, the day on which the great fetes annually offered by the
capital of Algeria to the Arabs would commence.

I must say that I was much influenced in my determination by the
knowledge that my mission to Algeria had a quasi-political
character.  I, a simple conjurer, was proud of being able to render
my country a service.

It is known that the majority of revolts which have to be
suppressed in Algeria are excited by intriguers, who say they are
inspired by the Prophet, and are regarded by the Arabs as envoys of
God on earth to deliver them from the oppression of the Roumi
(Christians).

These false prophets and holy Marabouts, who are no more sorcerers
than I am, and indeed even less so, still contrive to influence the
fanaticism of their coreligionists by tricks as primitive as are
the spectators before whom they are performed.

The government was, therefore, anxious to destroy their pernicious
influence, and reckoned on me to do so.  They hoped, with reason,
by the aid of my experiments, to prove to the Arabs that the tricks
of their Marabouts were mere child's play, and owing to their
simplicity could not be done by an envoy from Heaven, which also
led us very naturally to show them that we are their superiors in
everything, and, as for sorcerers, there are none like the French.

Presently I will show the success obtained by these skillful
tactics.

Three months were to elapse between the day of my acceptance and
that of my departure which I employed in arranging a complete
arsenal of my best tricks, and left St. Gervais on the 10th of
September.

I will give no account of my passage, further than to say no sooner
was I at sea than I wished I had arrived, and, after thirty-six
hours' navigation, I greeted the capital of our colony with
indescribable delight.

On the 28th of October, the day appointed for my first performance
before the Arabs, I reached my post at an early hour, and could
enjoy the sight of their entrance into the theater.

Each goum,[1] drawn up in companies, was introduced separately, and
led in perfect order to the places chosen for it in advance.  Then
came the turn of the chiefs, who seated themselves with all the
gravity becoming their character.


[1] Brigade of native soldiers under French command.  It was this
influential native faction that the Foreign Office wished
particularly to impress, through Robert-Houdin's skill.--EDITOR.


Their introduction lasted some time, for these sons of nature could
not understand that they were boxed up thus, side by side, to enjoy
a spectacle, and our comfortable seats, far from seeming so to
them, bothered them strangely.  I saw them fidgeting about for some
time, and trying to tuck their legs under them, after the fashion
of European tailors.

The caids, agas, bash-agas, and other titled Arabs, held the places
of honor, for they occupied the orchestra stalls and the dress
circle.

In the midst of them were several privileged officers, and, lastly,
the interpreters were mingled among the spectators, to translate my
remarks to them.

I was also told that several curious people, having been unable to
procure tickets, had assumed the Arab burnous, and, binding the
camel's-hair cord round their foreheads, had slipped in among their
new coreligionists.

This strange medley of spectators was indeed a most curious sight.
The dress circle, more especially, presented an appearance as grand
as it was imposing.  Some sixty Arab chiefs, clothed in their red
mantles (the symbol of their submission to France), on which one or
more decorations glistened, gravely awaited my performance with
majestic dignity.

I have performed before many brilliant assemblies, but never before
one which struck me so much as this.  However, the impression I
felt on the rise of the curtain, far from paralyzing me, on the
contrary inspired me with a lively sympathy for the spectators,
whose faces seemed so well prepared to accept the marvels promised
them.  As soon as I walked on the stage, I felt quite at my ease,
and enjoyed, in anticipation, the sight I was going to amuse myself
with.

I felt, I confess, rather inclined to laugh at myself and my
audience, for I stepped forth, wand in hand, with all the gravity
of a real Sorcerer.  Still, I did not give way, for I was here not
merely to amuse a curious and kind public, I must produce a
startling effect upon coarse minds and prejudices, for I was
enacting the part of a French Marabout.

Compared with the simple tricks of their pretended sorcerers, my
experiments must appear perfect miracles to the Arabs.

I commenced my performance in the most profound, I might almost say
religious, silence, and the attention of the spectators was so
great that they seemed petrified.  Their fingers alone moving
nervously, played with the beads of their rosaries, while they
were, doubtless, invoking the protection of the Most High.

This apathetic condition did not suit me, for I had not come to
Algeria to visit a waxwork exhibition.  I wanted movement,
animation, life in fact, around me.

I changed my batteries, and, instead of generalizing my remarks, I
addressed them more especially to some of the Arabs, whom I
stimulated by my words, and still more by my actions.  The
astonishment then gave way to a more expressive feeling, which was
soon evinced by noisy outbursts.

This was especially the case when I produced cannon balls from a
hat, for my spectators, laying aside their gravity, expressed their
delighted admiration by the strangest and most energetic gestures.

Then came--greeted by the same success--the bouquet of flowers,
produced instantaneously from a hat; the CORNUCOPIA, supplying a
multitude of objects which I distributed, though unable to satisfy
the repeated demands made on all sides, and still more by those who
had their hands full already; the FIVE-FRANC PIECES, sent across
the theater with a crystal box suspended above the spectators.

One trick I should much have liked to perform was the INEXHAUSTIBLE
BOTTLE, so appreciated by the Parisians and the Manchester "hands";
but I could not employ it in this performance, for it is well known
the followers of Mohammed drink no fermented liquor--at least not
publicly.  Hence, I substituted the following with considerable
advantage:

I took a silver cup, like those called "punch bowls" in the
Parisian cafes.  I unscrewed the foot, and passing my wand through
it showed that the vessel contained nothing; then, having refitted
the two parts, I went to the center of the pit, when, at my
command, the bowl was MAGICALLY filled with sweetmeats, which were
found excellent.

The sweetmeats exhausted, I turned the bowl over, and proposed to
fill it with excellent coffee; so, gravely passing my hand thrice
over the bowl, a dense vapor immediately issued from it, and
announced the presence of the precious liquid.  The bowl was full
of boiling coffee, which I poured into cups, and offered to my
astounded spectators.

The first cups were only accepted, so to speak, under protest; for
not an Arab would consent to moisten his lips with a beverage which
he thought came straight from Shaitan's kitchen; but, insensibly
seduced by the perfume of their favorite liquor, and urged by the
interpreters, some of the boldest decided on tasting the magic
liquor, and all soon followed their example.

The vessel, rapidly emptied, was repeatedly filled again with equal
rapidity; and it satisfied all demands, like my inexhaustible
bottle, and was borne back to the stage still full.

But it was not enough to amuse my spectators; I must also, in order
to fulfill the object of my mission, startle and even terrify them
by the display of a supernatural power.

My arrangements had all been made for this purpose, and I had
reserved for the end of my performances three tricks, which must
complete my reputation as a sorcerer.

Many of my readers will remember having seen at my performances a
small but solidly built box, which, being handed to the spectators,
becomes heavy or light at my order; a child might raise it with
ease, and yet the most powerful man could not move it from its
place.

I advanced, with my box in my hand, to the center of the
"practicable," communicating from the stage to the pit; then,
addressing the Arabs, I said to them:

"From what you have witnessed, you will attribute a supernatural
power to me, and you are right.  I will give you a new proof of my
marvelous authority, by showing that I can deprive the most
powerful man of his strength and restore it at my will.  Anyone who
thinks himself strong enough to try the experiment may draw near
me."  (I spoke slowly, in order to give the interpreter time to
translate my words.)

An Arab of middle height, but well built and muscular, like many of
the Arabs are, came to my side with sufficient assurance.

"Are you very strong?" I said to him, measuring him from head to
foot.

"Oh, yes!" he replied carelessly.

"Are you sure you will always remain so?"

"Quite sure."

"You are mistaken, for in an instant I will rob you of your
strength, and you shall become as a little child."

The Arab smiled disdainfully as a sign of his incredulity.

"Stay," I continued; "lift up this box."

The Arab stooped, lifted up the box, and said to me, coldly, "Is
that all?"

"Wait--!" I replied.

Then, with all possible gravity, I made an imposing gesture, and
solemnly pronounced the words:

"Behold! you are weaker than a woman; now, try to lift the box."

The Hercules, quite cool as to my conjuration, seized the box once
again by the handle, and gave it a violent tug, but this time the
box resisted, and, spite of his most vigorous attacks, would not
budge an inch.

The Arab vainly expended on this unlucky box a strength which would
have raised an enormous weight, until, at length, exhausted,
panting, and red with anger, he stopped, became thoughtful, and
began to comprehend the influences of magic.

He was on the point of withdrawing; but that would be allowing his
weakness, and that he, hitherto respected for his vigor, had become
as a little child.  This thought rendered him almost mad.

Deriving fresh strength from the encouragements his friends offered
him by word and deed, he turned a glance round them, which seemed
to say: "You will see what a son of the desert can do."

He bent once again over the box: his nervous hands twined round the
handle, and his legs, placed on either side like two bronze
columns, served as a support for the final effort.

But, wonder of wonders! this Hercules, a moment since so strong and
proud, now bows his head; his arms, riveted to the box, undergo a
violent muscular contraction; his legs give way, and he falls on
his knees with a yell of agony!

An electric shock, produced by an inductive apparatus, had been
passed, on a signal from me, from the further end of the stage into
the handle of the box.  Hence the contortions of the poor Arab!

It would have been cruelty to prolong this scene.

I gave a second signal, and the electric current was immediately
intercepted.  My athlete, disengaged from his terrible bondage,
raised his hands over his head.

"Allah! Allah!" he exclaimed, full of terror; then wrapping himself
up quickly in the folds of his burnous, as if to hide his disgrace,
he rushed through the ranks of the spectators and gained the front
entrance.

With the exception of my stage boxes and the privileged spectators
who appeared to take great pleasure in this experiment, my audience
had become grave and silent, and I heard the words "Shaitan!"
"Djenoum!" passing in murmur round the circle of credulous men,
who, while gazing on me, seemed astonished that I possessed none of
the physical qualities attributed to the angel of darkness.

I allowed my public a few moments to recover from the emotion
produced by my experiment and the flight of the herculean Arab.

One of the means employed by the Marabouts to gain influence in the
eyes of the Arabs is by causing a belief in their invulnerability.

One of them, for instance, ordered a gun to be loaded and fired at
him from a short distance, but in vain did the flint produce a
shower of sparks; the Marabout pronounced some cabalistic words,
and the gun did not explode.

The mystery was simple enough; the gun did not go off because the
Marabout had skillfully stopped up the vent.

Colonel de Neven explained to me the importance of discrediting
such a miracle by opposing to it a sleight-of-hand trick far
superior to it, and I had the very article.

I informed the Arabs that I possessed a talisman rendering me
invulnerable, and I defied the best marksman in Algeria to hit me.

I had hardly uttered the words when an Arab, who had attracted my
notice by the attention he had paid to my tricks, jumped over four
rows of seats, and disdaining the use of the "practicable," crossed
the orchestra, upsetting flutes, clarionets, and violins, escaladed
the stage, while burning himself at the footlights, and then said,
in excellent French:

"I will kill you!"

An immense burst of laughter greeted both the Arab's picturesque
ascent and his murderous intentions, while an interpreter who stood
near me told me I had to deal with a Marabout.

"You wish to kill me!" I replied, imitating his accent and the
inflection of his voice.  "Well, I reply, that though you are a
sorcerer, I am still a greater one, and you will not kill me."

I held a cavalry pistol in my hand, which I presented to him.

"Here, take this weapon, and assure yourself it has undergone no
preparation."

The Arab breathed several times down the barrel, then through the
nipple, to assure himself there was a communication between them,
and after carefully examining the pistol, said:

"The weapon is good, and I will kill you."

"As you are determined, and for more certainty, put in a double
charge of powder, and a wad on the top."

"It is done."

"Now, here is a leaden ball; mark it with your knife, so as to be
able to recognize it, and put it in the pistol, with a second wad."

"It is done."

"Now that you are quite sure your pistol is loaded, and that it
will explode, tell me, do you feel no remorse, no scruple about
killing me thus, although I authorize you to do so?"

"No, for I wish to kill you," the Arab repeated coldly.

Without replying, I put an apple on the point of a knife, and,
standing a few yards from the Marabout, ordered him to fire.

"Aim straight at the heart," I said to him.

My opponent aimed immediately, without the slightest hesitation.

The pistol exploded, and the bullet lodged in the center of the
apple.

I carried the talisman to the Marabout, who recognized the ball he
had marked.

I could not say that this trick produced greater stupefaction than
the ones preceding it: at any rate, my spectators, palsied by
surprise and terror, looked round in silence, seeming to think,
"Where the deuce have we got to here!"

A pleasant scene, however, soon unwrinkled many of their faces.
The Marabout, though stupefied by his defeat, had not lost his
wits; so, profiting by the moment when he returned me the pistol,
he seized the apple, thrust it into his waist belt, and could not
be induced to return it, persuaded as he was that he possessed in
it an incomparable talisman.

For the last trick in my performance I required the assistance of
an Arab.

At the request of several interpreters, a young Moor, about twenty
years of age, tall, well built, and richly dressed, consented to
come on the stage.  Bolder and more civilized, doubtless, than his
comrades of the plains, he walked firmly up to me.

I drew him toward the table that was in the center of the stage,
and pointed out to him and to the other spectators that it was
slightly built and perfectly isolated.  After which, without
further preface, I told him to mount upon it, and covered him with
an enormous cloth cone, open at the top.

Then, drawing the cone and its contents on to a plank, the ends of
which were held by my servant and myself, we walked to the
footlights with our heavy burden, and upset it.  The Moor had
disappeared--the cone was perfectly empty!

Immediately there began a spectacle which I shall never forget.

The Arabs were so affected by this last trick, that, impelled by an
irresistible feeling of terror, they rose in all parts of the
house, and yielded to the influence of a general panic.  To tell
the truth, the crowd of fugitives was densest at the door of the
dress circle, and it could be seen, from the agility and confusion
of these high dignitaries, that they were the first to wish to
leave the house.

Vainly did one of them, the Caid of the Beni-Salah, more courageous
than his colleagues, try to restrain them by his words:

"Stay! stay! we cannot thus lose one of our coreligionists.  Surely
we must know what has become of him, or what has been done to him.
Stay! stay!"

But the coreligionists only ran away the faster, and soon the
courageous caid, led away by their example, followed them.

They little knew what awaited them at the door of the theater; but
they had scarce gone down the steps when they found themselves face
to face with the "resuscitated Moor."

The first movement of terror overcome, they surrounded the man,
felt and cross-questioned him; but, annoyed by these repeated
questions, he had no better recourse than to escape at full speed.

The next evening the second performance took place, and produced
nearly the same effect as the previous one.


The blow was struck: henceforth the interpreters and all those who
had dealings with the Arabs received orders to make them understand
that my pretended miracles were only the result of skill, inspired
and guided by an art called prestidigitation, in no way connected
with sorcery.

The Arabs doubtless yielded to these arguments, for henceforth I
was on the most friendly terms with them.  Each time a chief saw
me, he never failed to come up and press my hand.  And, even more,
these men whom I had so terrified, when they became my friends,
gave me a precious testimony of their esteem--I may say, too, of
their admiration, for that is their own expression.


IV

FACING THE ARAB'S PISTOL


[The severest trial of all was unexpectedly encountered during a
visit paid by the conjurer and his wife to Bou-Allem-ben-Sherifa,
Bash-Aga of the Djendel, a tribe of the desert interior.]


We entered a small room very elegantly decorated, in which were two
divans.

"This," our host said, "is the room reserved for guests of
distinction; you can go to bed when you like, but if you are not
tired, I would ask your leave to present to you several chief men
of my tribe, who, having heard of you, wish to see you."

"Let them come in," I said, after consulting Madame Houdin, "we
will receive them with pleasure."

The interpreter went out, and soon brought in a dozen old men,
among whom were a Marabout and several talebs, whom the bash-aga
appeared to hold in great deference.

They sat down in a circle on carpets and kept up a very lively
conversation about my performances at Algiers.  This learned
society discussed the probability of the marvels related by the
chief of the tribe, who took great pleasure in depicting his
impressions and those of his coreligionists at the sight of the
MIRACLES I had performed.

Each lent an attentive ear to these stories, and regarded me with a
species of veneration; the Marabout alone displayed a degree of
skepticism, and asserted that the spectators had been duped by what
he called a vision.

Jealous of my reputation as a French sorcerer, I thought I must
perform before the unbeliever a few tricks as a specimen of my late
performance.  I had the pleasure of astounding my audience, but the
Marabout continued to offer me a systematic opposition, by which
his neighbors were visibly annoyed; the poor fellow did not
suspect, though, what I had in store for him.

My antagonist wore in his sash a watch, the chain of which hung
outside.

I believe I have already mentioned a certain talent I possess of
filching a watch, a pin, a pocketbook, etc., with a skill by which
several of my friends have been victimized.

I was fortunately born with an honest and upright heart, or this
peculiar talent might have led me too far.  When I felt inclined
for a joke of this nature, I turned it to profit in a conjuring
trick, or waited till my friend took leave of me, and then recalled
him: "Stay," I would say, handing him the stolen article, "let this
serve as a lesson to put you on your guard against persons less
honest than myself."

But to return to our Marabout.  I had stolen his watch as I passed
near him and slipped into its place a five-franc piece.

To prevent his detecting it, and while waiting till I could profit
by my larceny, I improvised a trick.  After juggling away Bou-
Allem's rosary, I made it pass into one of the numerous slippers
left at the door by the guests; this shoe was next found to be full
of coins, and to end this little scene comically, I made five-franc
pieces come out of the noses of the spectators.  They took such
pleasure in this trick that I fancied I should never terminate it.
"Douros! douros!"[1] they shouted, as they twitched their noses.  I
willingly acceded to their request, and the douros issued at
command.


[1] Gold Arabic coin.


The delight was so great that several Arabs rolled on the ground;
this coarsely expressed joy on the part of Mohammedans was worth
frenzied applause to me.

I pretended to keep aloof from the Marabout, who, as I expected,
remained serious and impassive.

When calm was restored, my rival began speaking hurriedly to his
neighbors, as if striving to dispel their illusion, and, not
succeeding, he addressed me through the interpreter:

"You will not deceive me in that way," he said, with a crafty look.

"Why so?"

"Because I don't believe in your power."

"Ah, indeed!  Well, then, if you do not believe in my power, I will
compel you to believe in my skill."

"Neither in one nor the other."

I was at this moment the whole length of the room from the
Marabout.

"Stay," I said to him; "you see this five-franc piece."

"Yes."

"Close your hand firmly, for the piece will go into it in spite of
yourself."

"I am ready," the Arab said, in an incredulous voice, as he held
out his tightly closed fist.

I took the piece at the end of my fingers, so that the assembly
might all see it, then, feigning to throw it at the Marabout, it
disappeared at the word "Pass!"

My man opened his hand, and, finding nothing in it, shrugged his
shoulders, as if to say, "You see, I told you so."

I was well aware the piece was not there, but it was important to
draw the Marabout's attention momentarily from the sash, and for
this purpose I employed the feint.

"That does not surprise me," I replied, "for I threw the piece with
such strength that it went right through your hand, and has fallen
into your sash.  Being afraid I might break your watch by the blow,
I called it to me: here it is!"  And I showed him the watch in my
hand.

The Marabout quickly put his hand in his waist belt, to assure
himself of the truth, and was quite stupefied at finding the five-
franc piece.

The spectators were astounded.  Some among them began telling their
beads with a vivacity evidencing a certain agitation of mind; but
the Marabout frowned without saying a word, and I saw he was
spelling over some evil design.

"I now believe in your supernatural power," he said; "you are a
real sorcerer; hence, I hope you will not fear to repeat here a
trick you performed in your theater"; and offering me two pistols
he held concealed beneath his burnous, he added, "Come, choose one
of these pistols; we will load it, and I will fire at you.  You
have nothing to fear, as you can ward off all blows."

I confess I was for a moment staggered; I sought a subterfuge and
found none.  All eyes were fixed upon me, and a reply was anxiously
awaited.

The Marabout was triumphant.

Bou-Allem, being aware that my tricks were only the result of
skill, was angry that his guest should be so pestered; hence he
began reproaching the Marabout.  I stopped him, however, for an
idea had occurred to me which would save me from my dilemma, at
least temporarily; then, addressing my adversary:

"You are aware," I said, with assurance, "that I require a talisman
in order to be invulnerable, and, unfortunately, I have left mine
at Algiers."

The Marabout began laughing with an incredulous air.  "Still," I
continued, "I can, by remaining six hours at prayers, do without
the talisman, and defy your weapon.  To-morrow morning, at eight
o'clock, I will allow you to fire at me in the presence of these
Arabs, who were witnesses of your challenge."

Bou-Allem, astonished at such a promise, asked me once again if
this offer were serious, and if he should invite the company for
the appointed hour.  On my affirmative, they agreed to meet before
the stone bench in the market place.

I did not spend my night at prayers, as may be supposed, but I
employed about two hours in insuring my invulnerability; then,
satisfied with the result, I slept soundly, for I was terribly
tired.

By eight the next morning we had breakfasted, our horses were
saddled, and our escort was awaiting the signal for our departure,
which would take place after the famous experiment.

None of the guests were absent, and, indeed, a great number of
Arabs came in to swell the crowd.

The pistols were handed me; I called attention to the fact that the
vents were clear, and the Marabout put in a fair charge of powder
and drove the wad home.  Among the bullets produced, I chose one
which I openly put in the pistol, and which was then also covered
with paper.

The Arab watched all these movements, for his honor was at stake.

We went through the same process with the second pistol and the
solemn moment arrived.

Solemn, indeed, it seemed to everybody--to the spectators who were
uncertain of the issue, to Madame Houdin, who had in vain besought
me to give up this trick, for she feared the result--and solemn
also to me, for as my new trick did not depend on any of the
arrangements made at Algiers, I feared an error, an act of
treachery--I knew not what.

Still I posted myself at fifteen paces from the sheik, without
evincing the slightest emotion.

The Marabout immediately seized one of the pistols, and, on my
giving the signal, took a deliberate aim at me.  The pistol went
off, and the ball appeared between my teeth.

More angry than ever, my rival tried to seize the other pistol, but
I succeeded in reaching it before him.

"You could not injure me," I said to him, "but you shall now see
that my aim is more dangerous than yours.  Look at that wall."

I pulled the trigger, and on the newly whitewashed wall appeared a
large patch of blood, exactly at the spot where I had aimed.

The Marabout went up to it, dipped his finger in the blood, and,
raising it to his mouth, convinced himself of the reality.  When he
acquired this certainty, his arms fell, and his head was bowed on
his chest, as if he were annihilated.

It was evident that for the moment he doubted everything, even the
Prophet.

The spectators raised their eyes to heaven, muttered prayers, and
regarded me with a species of terror.

This scene was a triumphant termination to my performance.  I
therefore retired, leaving the audience under the impression I had
produced.  We took leave of Bou-Allem and his son, and set off at a
gallop.


The trick I have just described, though so curious, is easily
prepared.  I will give a description of it, while explaining the
trouble it took me.

As soon as I was alone in my room, I took out of my pistol case--
without which I never travel--a bullet mold.

I took a card, bent up the four edges, and thus made a sort of
trough, in which I placed a piece of wax taken from one of the
candles.  When it was melted, I mixed with it a little lampblack I
had obtained by putting the blade of a knife over the candle, and
then ran this composition in the bullet mold.

Had I allowed the liquid to get quite cold, the ball would have
been full and solid; but in about ten seconds I turned the mold
over, and the portions of the wax not yet set ran out, leaving a
hollow ball in the mold.  This operation is the same as that used
in making tapers, the thickness of the outside depending on the
time the liquid has been left in the mold.

I wanted a second ball, which I made rather more solid than the
other; and this I filled with blood, and covered the orifice with a
lump of wax.  An Irishman had once taught me the way to draw blood
from the thumb without feeling any pain, and I employed it on this
occasion to fill my bullet.

Bullets thus prepared bear an extraordinary resemblance to lead,
and are easily mistaken for that metal when seen at a short
distance off.

With this explanation, the trick will be easily understood.  After
showing the leaden bullet to the spectators, I changed it for my
hollow ball, and openly put the latter into the pistol.  By
pressing the wad tightly down, the wax broke into small pieces, and
could not touch me at the distance I stood.

At the moment the pistol was fired, I opened my mouth to display
the lead bullet I held between my teeth, while the other pistol
contained the bullet filled with blood, which bursting against the
wall, left its imprint, though the wax had flown to atoms.


It is no wonder that after such exhibitions Robert-Houdin's success
was complete.  The Arabs lost all confidence in Marabout
"miracles," and thus a dangerous smoldering flame of disaffection
to the French was entirely smothered.--EDITOR.



David P. Abbott

Fraudulent Spiritualism Unveiled[1]


[1] As to whether communication with the departed is possible, no
discussion is here attempted.  The episodes following, from
experiences well authenticated, merely illustrate what sleight-of-
hand experts have long known--that most "mediums," "astrologers,"
"mind readers," and the like, can be proven to be frauds.  Their
dupes are puzzled, and sometimes won over, in the name of
Spiritualism, either by the tricks familiar to all "conjurers," or
else by the psychology of deception (see page 280).  Some of the
cleverness displayed is marvelous, as the following pages show.
The passages by Hereward Carrington are copyrighted by Herbert B.
Turner & Co., 1907, and those by David P. Abbott are copyrighted by
the Open Court Publishing Company, 1907--EDITOR.


THE METHODS OF A "DOCTOR OF THE OCCULT"


Not so very long ago I met a friend--a man of wealth, who was a
firm believer in spiritualism, and who frequently conversed with
his dead wife and daughter.  I asked him if he could inform me
whether or not there were any good mediums in the city, as I should
like to consult one.

He replied that at present there were none in Omaha of any well-
developed psychic powers; that he was entirely satisfied on the
subject and did not require any demonstrations to convince himself
of the truths of spiritual science.  He informed me that the
question was settled beyond all dispute; but that if I were
skeptical, there was said to be a medium in Council Bluffs who
possessed most wonderful powers.

I accordingly made other inquiries from those who were in a
position to know; and I learned that this medium, a celebrated
"Doctor of the Occult, Astrologer, Palmist and Spirit Medium," was
at that time giving private sittings in Council Bluffs to earnest
inquirers only, for the small sum of two dollars.

I was informed that his performances were of the most wonderful
nature; that there was no possibility of trickery of any kind; that
he told you whatever you desired to know, without your even asking
him; that, in addition to this, he had powers over the elements of
nature; and, in fact, I was led to believe that he was a true
sorcerer of the olden days.

I determined at once to call on this renowned personage, and try to
secure a little information from the unseen world.  Accordingly,
one Sunday afternoon I took the car that crossed the river, and in
due time arrived at the apartments of this wonderful doctor.

I was met at the door by an attendant, who accepted the fee and
directed me to enter the rooms of this mysterious person quietly;
and if I found him employed, by no means to disturb him, but merely
to await his pleasure; that he was frequently conversing with
unseen beings, or deep in some astrological computation, and at
such times it was not safe to disturb him.

With a beating heart I entered the room where he was to be found.
This room was a large one.  I did not see him at first.  What
attracted my attention was a large map or painting on a piece of
canvas which hung on a wall space in the room.  This painting had a
representation of the sun in its center.  This could be discovered
by the rays which radiated from it in all directions.  Around this
sun were many stars, and an occasional planet, among which Saturn
and its rings were very prominently depicted.  There were numerous
pictures of animals and men, and of queer monsters, scattered among
the stars.

Beneath this picture stood a large golden oak table at which sat
this delver into the occult, deeply engrossed in a study of this
painting; while with a little brush he figured and calculated, in a
queer sort of Chinese characters, which he drew on a sheet of
paper.  He also seemed to be making a strange drawing on the same
paper.  He was far too deeply engaged to notice my entrance, and
continued at his labors for some time, while I stood quietly and
watched him.  Sitting on one end of this rather large table was a
glass globe or vessel, supported by three nickeled rods, something
like a tripod.  Coming from the wall was a rather large nickeled
tube or pipe which curved over above the glass vessel, and
continually allowed drops of water to fall into the globe.  From
the side of this glass vessel there led a small nickeled pipe which
evidently carried away the waste water.

Occasionally a little blue flame would appear on the surface of
this water, play about, and disappear.  When this happened the body
of the medium was always convulsed slightly.

After a time he seemed to finish his calculation, and this seer
condescended to leave the realms of the stars wherein dwelt the
spirits that rule the universe and the destinies of men, and to
descend to earth and for a time direct his gaze toward this humble
mortal.  He turned around and observed me for the first time.  He
was a large, portly, fine-looking gentleman of middle age, with
very long black hair which gave him a strange appearance.  He wore
a pair of glasses low down on his nose; and from over these he
condescended to direct his gaze at, and to study me for a moment as
a naturalist might study some specimen that happened temporarily to
attract his notice.

He soon informed me that the stars had told him something of my
coming and of the question that was worrying me; and he asked me if
I desired to consult the stars as to my destiny, to have him
decipher it from the lines of my palm, or whether I should prefer
to converse with the dead.  The last was my choice.

Not far from a window at one side of the room there was a small
table on which were a few articles.  He directed me to be seated at
this table, and handed me a slip of paper of a size of probably
four by five inches.  He directed me to write the question I
desired answered on this paper, and when through to fold the paper
in halves three times with the writing inside.  I did so while he
walked to his bowl of water apparently paying no attention to me,
and then returned.

When he had returned to a position opposite me at the table, he
reached to take my writing out of my hand; seeing which I quickly
bent down one corner of the paper and gave it to him.  He directed
one sharp glance at me as I did this, at the same time picking up
an envelope from the table with his other hand.  He held this
envelope open flap side toward me, and slowly inserted my paper
into it.  As he did this, looking sharply at me, he remarked, "I am
no sleight-of-hand performer.  You see your question is actually in
the envelope."  This was the case; for it was close to me and I
could plainly see the top of it against the back of the envelope,
the lower portions being inserted; and I could see the little
corner folded down, as I had bent it, and I was certain he had not
exchanged it.  In fact he took occasion to use his hands in such
manner that I could see there was nothing concealed about them,
that he "palmed" nothing, and that he made no exchange.  I was
entirely satisfied that all was fair, and that no exchange had been
made.

Next, he sealed the envelope, and holding it toward the window,
called my attention to the fact that as the envelope was partly
transparent I could see my paper within it and that it was actually
there.  This was really the case.  He now took a match, and
lighting it applied the flame to this identical envelope without
its leaving my sight; and proceeded to burn the last vestige of it
and the paper within it, allowing the ashes to drop into a small
vessel on the table.

There was no doubt that he did not exchange envelopes and that he
burned it before my very eyes.  He now took the ashes and emptied
them into the bowl of water on the side table.  A little blue flame
appeared on the surface of the water after that for a moment, and
then disappeared.

He now brought from a drawer a number of slates--about eight or ten
small slates with padded edges.  They were the smallest size of
slates, I should judge; and with them he brought another slate, a
trifle larger, probably two inches both longer and wider.  He
requested me to examine thoroughly or to clean them all to my own
satisfaction, and to stack the small ones on the table, one on top
of the other; and when all were thus placed, to place the large
slate on top of the stack.

While I was doing this he called to his attendant for a drink of
water, and incidentally stepped into the hall to receive it, so
that his menial would not profane this sanctuary with his presence.

Returning to the table he took a seat opposite me and placed one of
my hands and one of his on top of the slates.  In due time he took
up the slates and we found nothing.  He replaced them, and waited
for a few moments; then seeming dissatisfied with conditions, he
took up the top slate in his left hand and with his right hand
began writing a message for me.  He did this like mediums do
automatic writing, with eyes half closed; and while writing his
person was convulsed a few times.  He then opened his eyes and read
aloud what he had written, asking me if it answered my question.  I
replied that it did not, as it was entirely foreign to the subject.
Then seeming dissatisfied, he moistened his fingers, erased the
writing, and replaced the top slate on the stack of slates.

He now placed his hands on this slate again, and after a time
examined it; but it was still free from writing.  He lifted up some
of the other slates; but as there was no writing, he scattered the
slates around on the table and asked me to spread a large cloth
over them which he handed to me.  This I did, and under his
direction placed my arms and hands over this.  He walked to the
bowl of water on the side table, and gazed into it.  I watched him;
and I saw a rather large flame appear on the surface of the water,
dance about, and disappear.

He immediately informed me that he was certain that I now had a
message.  He remained at a distance while I examined the slates one
by one.  Finally, on one of them I found a message, neatly written
and covering the entire slate.  It read:

"Mrs. Piper is a genuine medium.  She possesses powers of a very
unusual nature.  Her tests given Hyslop and others are genuine.  Do
not be a skeptic.  You are making a mistake, dear friend.  It is
all plain to me now, and spirit is all there is.--WILL."

Now, the question I had written was addressed to a very dear friend
who is now dead, and read as follows:

"WILL J----: In regard to the medium, Mrs. Piper, of whom we
conversed on your last visit, I would ask if she be genuine, and if
the tests she gave Professor Hyslop and others were genuine.  Give
me a test."

This was all nicely done, and I am sure would have greatly
impressed nearly everyone.  Being a performer myself, I could of
course follow the performance in minute detail, and I am thus
enabled to give to the readers of this paper a detailed account of
the method used by the doctor.  I will state that since that time I
have very successfully operated this same test, minus the bowl of
water and flame of fire; and that I can assure all that it is very
practicable and that it is very deceptive.


HOW THE TRICKS SUCCEEDED


When the medium picked up the envelope in which to place my paper,
there was within it a duplicate piece of paper folded the same, and
of the same size (one inch and a quarter by two inches) as the one
I had folded.  He kept the face of this envelope opposite me so I
could not see that side of it.  On the face of it was a horizontal
slit cut with a knife.  This slit was about two inches long and was
situated about halfway down the face of the envelope.  The
duplicate folded paper was placed vertically in the envelope at its
center, so that its center was located against the slit.  This
piece of paper was held in position by a touch of paste at a point
opposite the slit, which caused it to adhere to the inside of the
back of the envelope.

When he picked up this prepared envelope with his left hand, he did
so with the slit side or face in his palm next to the fingers of
his left hand.  This envelope lay slit side down before he picked
it up; so that I did not see the face of the envelope at all, and
he kept that side of the envelope from me during the entire trick.
The paper within the envelope had been placed far enough down so
that its top part was not exposed to my view.  The envelope thus
appeared perfectly natural, as an ordinary one with nothing in it.

He thus held the envelope in his left hand, flap open wide, with
the back side of the envelope later to be sealed, facing me.  Now
he really inserted my paper in this envelope with his right hand as
he took it from me; but in fact, he pushed it down just behind the
hidden slip of paper within the envelope.  I mean that he inserted
it between the concealed slip and the face or slit side of the
envelope; and as he did this he caused the lower end of my slip of
paper to pass through the slit in the center of the front of the
envelope.  The lower portion of my slip was thus out of the
envelope on its rear side, between the front of the envelope and
the fingers of his left hand; although I could see nothing of this.
He pushed it down so that the top still remained in view with the
bent corner exposed, and then sealed the flap over it.

Holding the envelope toward the window, he called to my notice the
fact that my paper was within, and that I could see it plainly.  I
could see the shadow of the two papers, which appeared as one, and
thus his statement seemed correct.  Of course he did not show me
the rear side OR FACE of the envelope, with my paper protruding,
which was immediately behind the duplicate, so that the shadow of
it was also the shadow of the duplicate.

This shadow also hid from my view the shadow of the slit.  The
envelope was sealed fairly.

Now with his right hand he moved a small vessel on the table toward
himself.  Then taking the envelope in his right hand, slit side
downward, he held it close to this vessel; at the same time with
his left hand he took a match from his pocket and proceeded to burn
the envelope.  This move concealed the trick; and it was very
deceiving and cleverly done.  As he took the envelope from his left
hand with his right hand, he, with his left fingers touching the
protruding portion of my slip, caused it to remain in his left hand
and to be drawn entirely out of the slit.  His eyes followed the
envelope as his right hand took it; which naturally caused my eyes
to follow it, as his attention seemed centered on the envelope and
it appeared to occupy the stage of action.  This move was executed
in a moment, not requiring any time worth mentioning, although it
takes so long to describe it on paper intelligibly.  Now while his
eyes (and of course mine) followed the envelope, without pause his
left hand went into his left pocket in a natural manner to get the
match.  He, of course, left my slip in his pocket with his surplus
matches; and when he retired for the drink of water, he read my
question.

As to the slate trick, all was fair until he picked up the top
slate, wrote an automatic message, apparently read it aloud to me,
and then upon my informing him that the message did not answer my
question, he seemed dissatisfied, apparently erased the message,
and replaced the large slate on top of the stack of slates.  What
he really did was to pick up the large top slate, bottom side
toward himself, and at the same time to carry with it a small slate
pressed tightly against its under side.  He held the large slate
with its under side tilted from me, so I could not see this small
slate.  There being so many small slates in the stack, the
temporary absence of one from the stack attracted no notice.

He kept this small slate next to him out of my view, and really
wrote the message on the small slate which was next to him, and
which was concealed from my view by the larger slate.  He did not
read aloud what he had actually written, but merely pretended to do
so, repeating something entirely foreign to the subject instead.
What he had written really answered my question fully.  When he
appeared to erase the message, his movements were but a pretense;
and he did not erase it at all.  When he replaced the large slate
on the stack of slates, he, of course, replaced the small one which
was concealed under it, message side down.

It must be remembered that the operator, at the beginning of the
slate trick, first took up and examined the large slate a time or
so for a message; and finding none, seemed disappointed, and
finally wrote the automatic message; then on being informed that it
did not apply to the case, he seemed dissatisfied and appeared to
erase it.

After the message was written and the slates replaced, he examined
the top slate a time or so, and even lifted off a few small slates
looking for writing, but did not turn them over; then seeing
nothing, he scattered the slates around on the table, leaving their
same sides downward; and handing me the cover, he requested me to
cover them and place my hands on them.

The trick was now practically done.  As the slates had been
examined so many times and nothing found on them, even after the
automatic writing, the majority of persons would testify that there
was positively nothing on the slates when the medium left the
table.  The majority of persons would never remember that he at one
time wrote on the large slate and erased it.  The message being on
a small slate, and these being spread around, few would have known
that this message really appeared on the particular small slate
that was originally next the top of the stack.

Most people would have certified that they cleaned all of the
slates themselves, that the medium never touched any of the small
ones, and that he only laid his hands on top of the stack a few
times.  Some would even forget that the medium handled their
writing at all before burning it.

I am sure that the nickeled tube that carried the dripping water
into the space over the glass bowl, had a second tube within it;
through which his assistant from the adjoining room either blew, or
sent by some mechanism, the chemicals (probably potassium) that
would take fire and burn on striking the water.

          .          .          .          .          .

When I perform the slate trick described above, after writing the
"automatic" message, apparently erasing it, and replacing the
slates, I do not scatter the slates around on the table as this
medium did.  Instead, I proceed as I will now describe.

We place our palms on the stack, and after a time examine the large
slate for a message, but find none.  I may incidentally remark that
this last examination unconsciously verifies in the sitter's mind
the fact that I actually erased what I wrote "automatically."

I now look on some of the smaller slates for a message, but find
none.  When I do this I do not turn these slates over and look on
their under sides, but merely take off the top slate to see if
there be a message on the upper surface of the one under it.  I
merely remark, "Well, there is nothing on that slate," indicating
the second one from the top; and at the same time I drop the top
slate (now in my hand) on the table beside the stack.  I
immediately take off the second slate and repeat this same
performance, dropping it on top of the first one.  I keep on with
this performance until I have removed four or five of the slates,
and have them stacked in a second stack beside the first one.  Then
seeming to grow discouraged, I remark, "I guess there is no
message"; and I replace the second stack on the first stack.  This
places the message slate four or five slates down in the stack; as
the bottom slate of the second stack, being the top slate of the
original stack, is now the message slate.

I next up-edge the small slates and place a rubber band around them
placing them in the sitter's lap.  I, of course, place what was the
top of the stack downward when I do so.  As the stack is on the
side edges of the slates when I first up-edge them, I next bring
them upon the end edges, while I put the band in place.  It is now
easy to place the stack of slates upon the sitter's lap with the
top slate down and to attract no notice to this fact.  This is
because the position has been changed a time or so in placing the
band on; and I then take the stack in my hands by the edges of the
slates, and simply place what was the top side of the stack in the
beginning, at the bottom.

In due time I tell the subject to make an examination for a
message, and of course four or five slates down he finds a message
on the upper surface of one of the slates.

This seems very miraculous, as the slates have been so repeatedly
examined and nothing found.  Finding the message on the upper
surface of a middle slate, where but a moment before there was
nothing, seems to be truly a marvel.  The subject having cleaned
and stacked these slates himself, and having seen them examined so
many times, naturally feels impressed that the message comes by
some superhuman power.


THE NAME OF THE DEAD


In the book entitled Psychics: Facts and Theories, by Rev. Minot J.
Savage, at page 15, the following account will be found:

"Soon I began to hear raps, apparently on the floor, and then in
different parts of the room.  On this, the lady remarked, simply:
'Evidently there is some one here who wishes to communicate with
you.  Let us go into the front parlor, where it will be quieter.'
This we did, the raps following us, or rather beginning again as
soon as we were seated.  At her suggestion I then took pencil and
paper (which I happened to have in my bag), and sat at one side of
a marble-top table, while she sat at the other side in a rocker and
some distance away.  Then she said: 'As one way of getting at the
matter, suppose you do this:  You know what friends you have in the
spirit world.  Write now a list of names--any names you please,
real or fictitious, only among them somewhere include the names of
some friends in the spirit world who, you think, might like to
communicate with you, if such a thing were possible.'  I then
began.  I held a paper so that she could not possibly have seen
what I wrote, even though she had not been so far away.  I took
special pains that no movement or facial expression should betray
me.  Meantime she sat quietly rocking and talking.  As I wrote,
perhaps at the eighth or tenth name, I began to write the name of a
lady friend who had not been long dead.  I had hardly written the
first letter before there came three loud distinct raps.  Then my
hostess said, 'This friend of yours, of course, knows where she
died.  Write now a list of places, including in it the place of her
death, and see if she will recognize it.'  This I did, beginning
with Vienna, and so on with any that occurred to me.  Again I had
hardly begun to write the real name, when once more came three
raps.  And so on, concerning other matters.  I speak of these only
as specimens.

"Now, I cannot say that in this particular case the raps were not
caused by the toe joints of the lady.  The thing that puzzles me in
this theory, is as to how the toe joints happened to know the name
of my friend, where she died, etc., which facts the lady herself
did not know, and never had known."

It has been the writer's good fortune to witness practically this
same experiment, performed by a very expert medium, Dr.
Schlossenger, who was traveling over the country a few years ago.

I was residing at that time in Falls City, Neb., a place of a few
thousand population.  For two winters I had traveled some as a
magician, so when the medium came to town, and began to perform his
miracles, certain members of the community suggested having me
witness one of his seances, thinking I would be able to discover
whether his tests were genuine, or whether they were performed by
the aid of trickery.  Accordingly, one evening, a prominent
physician invited me, with certain relatives and friends, to attend
a seance given in his parlors.

When we arrived I was introduced to the medium, an elderly
gentleman with a long white beard, and wearing glasses.  He
appeared to be slightly deaf, as he placed his hand to his ear and
had my name repeated.  He was introduced to the remainder of the
company en masse, the names of the visitors not being given to him.

The medium soon announced that "his mission on this earth was to
absolutely prove to humanity the immortality of the soul."  He now
offered to give some tests to those desiring it, and asked for a
small table which was placed in an adjoining room.  He invariably
held his hand to his ear, to catch what was being said, being
apparently quite deaf.  He also used this same expedient when
listening to the voices of the unseen spirits, and reporting their
communications.

My father and another gentleman were selected for the first test,
as they were considered very skeptical in such matters.  As they
retired to a closed room I did not see the experiment, but will
give some parts of it as reported to me, farther on.  In a short
time they returned to the parlor, engaged in a discussion over the
matter; and my father remarked, "I do not know how you got your
information, but I feel certain it was not from my brother, or he
would have given a certain point correctly."  The medium then said,
"If I will tell you where your father died, and the disease he died
of, will you be convinced?"  My father replied, "I suppose I will
have to be, if you can do that."

They then retired, and the medium succeeded partially in the
experiment; and would have certainly succeeded entirely, had my
father followed his instructions.  I will describe what was
reported to me of this test, farther on.

I now offered myself for a test.  I retired to the room with the
medium, and incidentally offered him one dollar and fifty cents,
the same my father had given him; but he refused the money, saying:
"Your father is not convinced, and I will not take any more money."

He now took a sheet of paper from a tablet, and drew five straight
lines across it, spacing the sheet into six spaces about equal.
Next taking my hand, and looking earnestly into my face, he said:
"Promise me that if I succeed, you will not make light of this.
Promise me, for this is very sacred to me."  I did so.  He now
directed me to write names in the spaces on the sheet, any names I
pleased, writing but one name in each space.  All the names were to
be of living or fictitious persons except one, this one to be the
name of some one I had known who was then dead.  He said, "Be fair
with me, and I will scratch out the dead person's name."  These
were his exact words, therefore I in no way tried to hide my
writing from him, although he stood at a distance and did not
appear to watch me.  I took a pencil and began writing the names;
being unprepared I had to think of the names I wished to write.  I
desired to select names of persons living at a distance, so that he
could in no possible manner know them.  While I was writing he
talked incessantly, which in spite of myself divided my attention.
At the same time he kept urging me to write, and immediately after
urging me, would begin talking rapidly on some spiritualistic
subject.  I remember saying, "You must give me time to think."  I
thought I used great care, so as to write each name with the same
precision, and tried to betray no emotion when writing the dead
person's name.  I selected the name "Cora Holt" for the dead
person's name.  This was the name of an aunt who had died in
another State.

As soon as I had written the names he asked me to cut them apart
into slips, having one name on each slip.  Now here I do not
remember whether he folded them himself, or had me help, as I was
not expecting them to be folded.  However, we folded each one into
a billet with the writing inside.

He now directed me to place them in a hat, and to hold the hat
under the table, take out the billets one at a time, and throw them
on the table top.  This I did while he stood with his right arm
extended toward the table and about one foot above it.  After I had
thrown a few billets on the table, as I threw the next one, I heard
three loud distinct raps.  He said, "There, that's the one that is
dead.  Open it and see if I am right, but do not let me see it.
Fold it up again and place it in your pocket."  I opened the
billet.  I did not know what the name would be, as I had mixed them
under the table; yet I had a feeling that it was correct.  I opened
it and sure enough the name was "Cora Holt."  I refolded it,
placing it in my pocket.  I must confess that I felt a momentary
creepy feeling pass over me, as my emotions were wrought up to such
a pitch by the intense manner in which I had watched all the
details of the experiment.  I informed him that he was right, but
did not tell him the name.  He now took my hand in his, and leading
me into the parlor, had me state to the company what had just
occurred.  Now placing his hand on my head, he said: "I will
endeavor to give you the name."  Closing his eyes, his body
trembled or shuddered with a kind of paroxysm, and apparently with
a great effort he pronounced the name "Cora Holt."  This effort
seemed to greatly exhaust him, and coming out of his temporary
trance he begged us to excuse him, saying that there were opposing
spirits present and he could do no more that night; that he had
done all for us that lay within his power.  He now took his leave.

This was all very impressive to me at the time, except the raps.
It was only afterwards that I thought out the explanation, which I
will give farther on.  As to the raps, they had the sound as of a
pencil tapping loudly on a thin strip of wood, or a ruler, and not
the sound of tapping on a table.  I had previously known of the
mechanical and electrical rappers, supplied by certain conjuring
depots, and worn on the person of the medium, or attached to a
table.  My impression was at the time that possibly he had a rapper
in the sleeve of the arm extended over the table, and by directing
the attention to the table the sound would appear to come from
there.  As I was sitting right against the table, I will say that
the sound did not appear to me to come from the table, but more
nearly from his person.

Referring again to the test given my father, the medium first
announced his prices, which he would accept if satisfactory.  This
was agreed to and paid.  He then had my father write names on paper
in a manner similar to the way I have described, except he did not
request my father to write a dead person's name; instead, he
requested him to write, among other names, his mother's maiden
name, his wife's maiden name, his father's name, also the names of
certain members of his family and of some of his friends, some of
whom should be dead.  This my father did.

Among the names written by my father was his mother's maiden name,
viz., "Celestina Redexilana Phelps," a name certainly out of the
ordinary.  He also wrote his wife's maiden name, his father's name,
his brother's name, and several other names--six or eight
altogether.

When the medium had the billets taken out of the hat he said, "You
have there the name of your mother; the name is something like
'Celestia (not Celestina) Roxalena (not Redexilana) Phelps,'" thus
giving wrong pronunciations to the first two names.  However, when
my father opened it, sure enough it was his mother's maiden name.
My father now took another billet which had written thereon his
father's name.  This the medium gave correctly, stating that this
was his father's name.  The next billet had written thereon the
name of my father's brother; the name was James Asahel Abbott."
The medium then said:  "Your brother James is here, and he says to
tell you that he is happy and that you are making a great mistake
not to believe."

Now this brother had always been called by his second name and not
by the name of James.  My father said, "If you are my brother, give
me your full name."  The medium replied, "James Ash-a-bell Abbott,"
giving an entirely wrong pronunciation of the second name.  This it
was, with some other error, that led to the discussion they had on
returning to the parlor, and in which my father remarked, "If you
get your information from the dead, they should be able to
pronounce their own names correctly."

My father, not being familiar with the methods of trickery, could
not with exactness give all the minute details of the test as I
would have wished; and as I never had an opportunity to see this
experiment myself, I can only surmise the means employed in its
production.

The second experiment with my father had been an effort to tell the
disease of which my grandfather died, also the place where he died.
The medium required my father to write on the usual ruled paper, a
name of a disease and also a name of a place, in each space, that
is, one disease and one place in each space.  He remarked in giving
directions, "Like New York measles, Philadelphia smallpox, etc."
He required, however, that my father write IN THE SAME SPACE the
correct disease, and also the correct place of his father's death.
The remainder of the spaces were to contain the names of any
disease or any place he might choose.

This my father did, writing in one space "Sacramento dysentery."
This was the correct disease, but the city was the place of my
grandfather's burial, and not the place of his death, the latter
being a village called "Hangtown."  The medium quickly gave
dysentery as the disease, and Sacramento as the place of my
grandfather's death.  It was plain that had my father written the
village where his father died, instead of his burial place, the
medium would have succeeded.

This, however, proved beyond a doubt that the medium obtained his
information FROM THE WRITING, and not from the spirits of the dead.

          .          .          .          .          .

After thinking the matter over, I decided that, while I was
uncertain as to the manner in which Dr. Schlossenger had performed
all of these experiments, I could reproduce two of them with
certainty as often as he did.  I immediately made the trial and
found I could succeed fully nine times out of ten on an average.  I
might state that the doctor also failed about one time in ten on an
average; nevertheless, the people of the community were greatly
excited, talking of his miracles, in groups on the streets, for
some days.  The medium was coining money, yet I found a few cases
where he failed totally.  The failures were seldom mentioned; it
was the successes that excited the people.

The method I use in reproducing the first test given me, is to so
direct the attention of the subjects before the writing, by my
discourse, as to cause them to select unconsciously the name of the
dead person in advance.  This is easily managed with a little
practice in talking, and still they will never guess that it is
done on purpose.

Now, as they begin to write, they will naturally pause before
writing each name, to think of a name to write.  The pause may be
but slight, yet there is some pause.  Of course, when they write
the selected name, no pause will be necessary; and if hurried
properly at that time they will make none.  This is the object of
the incessant talking during the experiment.  If left to
themselves, the subjects will, in about one half of the cases,
write the selected name in the third space from the top.  In about
half of the remaining cases the selected name will be written in
the fourth space from the top.  This is especially true if in your
instructions you direct the subject to "mix the dead person's name
somewhere in among the others where you cannot know where it is."
In the remaining cases the subjects are liable to write the
selected name anywhere, generally first or last.  Now my object is
to so manipulate my subjects as to cause them to write the selected
name when I want them to do so.  This is done by continuous
talking, and distracting their attention until the proper moment.
I choose the third space, since this, being the one they are most
liable to choose of their own accord, is the easiest to force.
Just as they begin to write the first name, before they make a
mark, I say suddenly, "Now be sure and select names of living
persons that I could not possibly know."  This is almost certain to
insure a pause, and the name of a living person to be written
first.  I continue my talking in a natural manner, taking the
attention to a great extent from the writing, and nearly always
observing another pause just before writing the second name.  When
the second name is almost finished I exclaim suddenly, "Now write
as rapidly as possible!"  If the subjects have been properly
impressed with the seriousness of the experiment, they will almost
invariably, on finishing the second name (in obedience to my
command "to be as rapid as possible," and in their desire to please
me), hurry into the name already in their minds, thus writing the
selected name in the third place.  If such is the case they will
now most surely pause to think of a fourth name.  If so, I am
certain that I now know the selected name.  However, if they should
rapidly pass into the fourth name, it is then uncertain whether the
selected name is in the third or fourth space.  This, however,
seldom happens if worked in an expert manner.

In rare cases the subject cannot be manipulated by the performer,
in which case it is purely guesswork; even in such cases, however,
I stand one chance in six of succeeding; and if I make a second
trial on failing (not uncommon with mediums), I stand one chance in
three of succeeding.

It is hardly worth while to say that as I fold the billets, I fold
the third one slightly different from the rest, so that while it
will not attract attention, I can see at a glance what it is when
thrown on the table.  I memorize the name; also, if in doubt, I
fold a second choice in a still different manner for a second
trial.  Frequently I memorize more of the names, folding so I can
pick them out.  Then, after giving the dead person's name with
proper effect, I pick up the others, hold them to my head and call
out the names.  The effect of this on a subject is very impressive.

With a little practice the above test can be given with very small
chance of failure; and in the event of making a failure it can be
explained by the statement that "there are opposing spirits
present," or some similar excuse.  If one has other tests at his
command, it is well, in the event of failure, to announce that he
will try something else, and then give another test.  As these
experiments are always tried alone with one or, at most, two
subjects, a failure attracts little notice.

Now I cannot say positively that Dr. Schlossenger performed this
experiment in exactly this same manner; but I do have a
recollection of his hurrying me along in my writing at some stage
of its progress.  I also know that I can succeed as often as he
did.  I will add further that a few days later I prepared six names
in advance, and, with my wife, had a sitting with the medium; this
time, although I paid him, he failed utterly.  He tried in every
way and had me write additional names.  This time I guarded the
points in the above explanation, yet no matter how he tried, he
made an utter failure.  All tricks require certain conditions, and
this is why it is not safe to repeat the same trick for the same
person.  There is too much danger that the subject may notice the
sameness of the modus operandi.

Referring to the second test which was given by the medium to my
father, I will state that when the subjects are writing the cities
and diseases, they will naturally pause after writing the city, to
think of a disease to go with it.  Of course, when writing the
correct ones, which are already in mind, no pause will be
necessary.  Also advantage may be taken of the fact that a small
per cent of persons die of smallpox or measles.  If in giving the
directions one says, "Write like this: 'Philadelphia smallpox, New
York measles,'" and the subject writes smallpox or measles in the
list, it is safe to eliminate that from the case.  This is
especially true if written in connection with some large city, the
name of which occurs readily to the mind.  It is safe also to
eliminate Philadelphia or New York if these should be written,
providing you mentioned these names in the directions, and that the
test is not being given in their section of the country.  A small
per cent of the people of a country die in any two places of
prominence.  Yet these places will be written readily by most
subjects if they are suggested, or at least other places of equal
prominence will be written.  If an unusual place or disease should
be written, it is almost certain these are the ones.

It can readily be seen how expert one can become at this by
continuous practice, such as a medium has many times a day; how one
can learn to take advantage of every little point, and use it with
telling effect on unsuspecting strangers, who do not know what is
going to happen, or what to look for.

I have been told that Dr. Schlossenger had a very sharp eye,
although wearing glasses; and that the glasses were probably to
make the subject think it impossible for him to read writing when
they were moved out of position and placed on the forehead, as they
were during the tests.  It has also been suggested that his poor
hearing was feigned, to enable him to hear remarks made about
himself in his presence.  I have suspected that his memory had
become trained to a high degree of accuracy, enabling him to give
his tests with such marvelous success, as he did with nearly all
wherever he went.  That he does not use one set of principles only
in his tricks, I am certain, but has many more at his command which
he uses continually.  However, I can only vaguely guess at them
from having seen his tests but once.

Now, I do not say that this was the method employed by the lady
with Rev. Savage, given in the account at the beginning of this
chapter.  But as the experiments are practically the same, it is
safe to conclude that the methods used are the same, or nearly so.
If the test were genuine in the case of the lady mentioned, it was
probably genuine in the case of Dr. Schlossenger.  On the other
hand, if it were trickery in one case, it probably was in both.



MIND READING IN PUBLIC


Not long ago I received a letter from an old-time friend, in which
he urgently requested me to make a journey to his city.  In bygone
days he and I had spent many hours together, discussing the
mysteries of existence, the hidden powers which nature manifests to
us, and the origin and destiny of the human soul.  My friend is a
physician, and what is more, an earnest student; and he is also an
investigator of that strange phenomenon in nature which manifests
itself in organized beings subjectively, as thought, feeling and
things spiritual.

Many times had we discussed the possibility and also the
probability of an existence of the spiritual part of man after
death.  Many times had he reported to me cases of strange phenomena
that tended to prove the indestructibility of spirit.

When I received this missive, it stated to me that the writer most
earnestly desired my presence in his city, that I might assist in
investigating a very strange and marvelous case of psychic
phenomena.  The case was that of a certain traveling spirit medium,
who claimed the power to summon from the realms of the invisible
the shades of our departed friends and loved ones.  He gave most
marvelous exhibitions to prove his strange and miraculous power.
My friend stated that he thought he had at last found a person with
at least some queer psychical gift, if not even possessing the
power that he claimed.  He had watched the exhibition most
carefully, and had even served on a committee on the psychic's
stage; and he could find no evidence of trickery of any kind.  He
was inclined to believe that this strange being really possessed
the power of vision without the use of human eyes as he certainly
read sealed missives, of which he could in no secret manner have
obtained knowledge.

Accordingly, on Saturday evening, I journeyed to a city one hundred
miles away to witness the work of this modern sorcerer.  On my
arrival I suggested to my friend a number of ways by which such
things could be performed by trickery, but he informed me that none
of my explanations seemed to elucidate this strange work.  The
secret did not consist in the use of odorless alcohol, for the
reason that the medium never touched the sealed envelopes at all.
In fact he was never nearer to them than ten feet.  This also made
it impossible for him to use the principle on which the trick is
based, which is known to the profession as "Washington Irving
Bishop's Sealed Letter Reading."

He informed me that sheets of paper or cards were passed to the
spectators in the audience, and at the same time envelopes in which
to seal their questions were furnished for them; that the
spectators wrote questions as directed, many times signing their
own names to them.  He was certain that many persons folded their
written questions before sealing them, and that the operator
himself did not even collect the envelopes on many occasions.  He
informed me that the best evidence of the genuineness of the
performance lay in the fact that the medium seemed to have no fixed
conditions for his experiments; but seemed to perform them in a
different manner on each occasion.  The conditions were different
in every case, yet he always read the questions with the most
marvelous certainty.

I thought the matter over after this, but could in no way think of
any plausible means of accomplishing his work by trickery.  I
finally decided to wait and see the performance first, and to
figure afterwards on the method employed.

Accordingly, at eight o'clock that evening I was seated in the hall
with my friend, and shortly afterwards the "Seer" made his
appearance, taking his seat on the stage.  He was a very slender
personage, with long hair and a particularly ghostly look.  He took
his seat quietly on the stage.  In a short time his manager
appeared and made an opening address, which I will not repeat, and
then asked some boy in the audience to pass cards around to the
spectators on which they were to write questions.  Envelopes were
also distributed, in which to seal the cards.  When the writing was
finished, the manager asked any boy to take a hat which he held in
his hand, and collect the sealed envelopes.  After the boy, whom
everyone knew to be a local resident, kindly volunteered for this
service and executed it, a committee was invited to the stage to
properly blindfold the medium.  This was done in a satisfactory
manner, and the committee then returned to the audience.  The
manager now led the blindfolded medium to the rear of the stage,
where he was seated somewhat behind a table, on which were some
flowers, a music box, etc.  However, the medium was in view
plainly; and he never removed the bandage from his eyes or in any
manner molested it.

When the boy came on the stage directly from the front with the hat
full of sealed envelopes, the manager placed a handkerchief over
the hat and asked the boy to take a seat near the front of the
stage facing the audience.  He was also directed to hold the hat in
his lap, and to deliver the envelopes to the manager, one at a
time, as he should call for them.

The operator now delivered a lecture, lasting some ten or fifteen
minutes, explaining the strange powers of the blindfolded medium,
who sat at the rear of the stage in full view; while the boy still
maintained the seat at the front of the stage, and held the hat of
envelopes in sight of all.

After the lecture, the manager requested the boy to give him one of
the envelopes, which the boy did.  The manager did not look toward
it in any manner; but took it in the tips of his right fingers,
held it in the air, and asked the medium to give the writer of this
question a test.  The medium shivered a few times, allowed his
frame to convulse slightly, and thus began:

"I feel the influence of one who was a brother.  I get the name of
Clarence.  Will the one who wrote this question identify it as
his?"  There was no response from the spectators, and the medium
asked again that the writer speak out.  Still silence greeted his
request; when suddenly he pointed his bony finger into the crowd,
while his blinded face confronted them, and exclaimed: "Mr. John
H----, why do you not respond to your test?"  A gentleman in the
audience then acknowledged the test as his.  The medium then
continued: "Clarence was drowned.  I sense the cold chilly water as
it envelopes his form."  At this the lady sitting with the
gentleman began to cry.  The medium continued: "The drowning was
wholly an accident.  There was no foul play.  Now, Mr. H----, have
I answered your question, and are you satisfied with your test?"
The gentleman, a well-known citizen, acknowledged that he was
perfectly satisfied.

The manager then laid the envelope on a small table and asked the
boy for another one.  The boy gave him another from the hat when
the blindfolded medium, ten feet or more distant, gave the second
test.

He shivered again and began: "I feel the influence of a young lady
who died suddenly.  She says, 'Sister Mary, I am very happy, and
death was not so hard to endure.  I want you to consult a good
honorable attorney, and take his advice in the lawsuit you ask me
about.'"  The medium then continued, " Miss L----, your sister
regards you with a look of great tenderness and love.  Are you
satisfied with your test?"  A lady then replied that she certainly
was entirely convinced.

The manager now laid this sealed envelope beside the other one and
again called for another.  This was continued until all of the
envelopes in the hat were removed and the questions answered.  None
of the envelopes were opened.  In some instances the medium first
read the questions, word for word, before answering them; and when
he did so, he described the writing minutely, even the formation of
the strokes of the letters.

After all of these tests were given, the medium removed the
blindfold and seemed much exhausted.  Then the tables were removed
to one side of the stage, and a cabinet erected; after which some
cabinet manifestations that were very interesting were given.  When
these were over, the manager collected the sealed envelopes from
the table, and placed them on the front of the stage, inviting the
writers to call, should they so desire, and get their questions.
Some availed themselves of this opportunity and tore open a number
of the envelopes until they found their own questions.  The
audience seemed greatly impressed with this exhibition, and the
next day it was the talk of the town.

          .          .          .          .          .

On the next evening I again repaired to the public hall to witness
and, if possible, fathom this performance.  This time, however, I
found that an entirely different method was employed.  Envelopes
and slips of paper were distributed; and after the questions were
written and sealed the manager went about the room, gathering them
up in a small black bag with a drawstring around its top.  As he
gathered up each one, and while the writer still held it, he gave
to that person a number which was to serve as that particular
person's number during the tests.  At the same time the manager
marked the number on the subject's envelope, while the subject held
it, drawing a circle around the figure, after which the subject
dropped the envelope into the sack.

When all were collected, the operator took the sack in the tips of
his fingers, and holding it aloft, walked up the runway to the
stage where a cord hung from a screw-eye fastened in the ceiling
above.  The other end of the cord was attached to a piece of
furniture on the stage.  The manager now attached the black bag
containing the envelopes to the end of this string, and then taking
the other end, drew the bag up to the ceiling near the screw-eye,
where it remained in full view during the tests.

While the manager was doing all this, the ghost-like medium had
been walking about the stage, reading in a large Bible.  He now
laid the Bible on a table and advanced to the front of the stage,
while the manager delivered a lecture on spiritual philosophy and
also on the strange power of the medium.  After this the manager
announced that the medium would hold a Bible service, during which
time he would give the tests.

The medium now took his Bible, and seating himself in a chair
facing the audience, began by reading a verse.  After this he
closed his eyes for a time, and then gave the first test.  He
began: "I will give these tests in the order in which the manager
gave you your numbers, commencing with number one.  Now, Mrs. Clara
S----, I see standing near you an elderly lady, somewhat stooped;
but I cannot see her face plainly.  She seems to be your mother.
She says to tell you that your son is doing well where he is, and
for you not to worry, for he will return to you in time.  Are you
satisfied?"  A lady in the audience was visibly affected, and
acknowledged that the medium had answered her question correctly.
The medium read another verse in the Bible, after which he gave the
second test in a manner similar to the way in which he had given
the first one.  After this he read another verse, and so continued
until all the questions in the sack were answered.  The manager now
lowered the sack, and emptying the envelopes into a small basket
distributed them unopened to their writers.

The effect of this exhibition was fully as great as was that of the
former one, and the medium continued to be the wonder of the town.

          .          .          .          .          .

On the next evening I again attended the meeting.  On this occasion
questions were written and sealed as on the former occasions.  This
time the medium was dressed as a "Mahatma," wearing a large turban.
As soon as the questions were written, the manager collected them
in a small wicker basket, and emptied them on a table on the stage.
He only talked for a moment, describing what the medium would do.
During all this time the medium was seated near the front of the
stage.  The medium now tapped a little bell he held in his hand, as
if summoning the spirits, and began giving the tests in the most
marvelous manner.  He seemed somewhat nervous, and finally arose
and walked across the stage, stopped a moment and then continued
his walk.  Meanwhile he kept giving the tests.  Occasionally he
would walk about nervously, and sometimes he would seat himself in
the chair for a time; but he kept right on giving test after test,
with perfect accuracy, while the sealed envelopes remained in full
view on the table.  During this time, and in fact during the time
the audience was writing the questions, neither the medium nor the
manager had ever left the sight of the spectators for even an
instant.

After all the tests were given, the medium, very much exhausted,
fell on a couch on the stage; while the manager scooped the
envelopes back into the basket, and then distributed them to their
writers in an unopened condition.

I will now explain how this "occultist" gave these various billet
tests.


We will first refer to the tests given the first evening.  A boy
from the audience gathered up the sealed envelopes in a hat, and
brought them to the stage, sitting with them in his lap; while he
delivered one at a time to the manager, who held it aloft, during
which time the blindfolded medium in the rear gave the test.

There was a simple little move that escaped the eyes of the
spectators in this instance.  The spectators did not know what was
to happen, neither did the boy.  The move was executed as follows:
Just as the boy came on the stage with the hat the manager received
the hat in his right hand and in a natural manner.  Nothing was
thought of this, as there was nothing suspicious in the act.
Meanwhile the manager directed the boy to take a chair that sat to
the left of the front of the stage, and to place it to the right
side in front, facing the audience, and to take his seat thereon.
Now, this conversation with the boy naturally occupied the
attention of the spectators; and while the boy was executing the
directions the manager turned to the table, which was somewhat back
on the stage, and apparently took a large handkerchief from it, and
with the hat still apparently in his hand, he stepped to the boy,
giving him the hat of envelopes and the handkerchief, at the same
time instructing him how to cover the hat, and how to deliver the
envelopes one at a time.  All of this maneuvering seemed so natural
that the audience thought nothing whatever of it.

Now, as the manager turned to the table to get the handkerchief,
and while most eyes were on the boy as he placed his chair and took
his seat, the manager deftly exchanged the hat in his right hand
for another hat just like it, that was filled with "dummy"
envelopes and which was behind the flowers, music box, etc., on the
table.  As he immediately turned with the hat apparently still in
his hand, but with a large handkerchief in his other hand,
everything seemed natural and the audience thought nothing of the
incident.

The manager now, after giving the boy the hat and handkerchief,
invited a committee to come forward and blindfold the medium who
had been seated at the left of the stage.  The committee first
placed a lady's glove on the eyes of the medium as an additional
precaution, and then placed a handkerchief over this and tied it
behind his head.  This method of blindfolding is the one usually
employed by most mediums.  If the face of the medium be properly
formed, he can easily shift such a bandage with his eyebrows,
sufficiently to see directly under his eyes, by looking down
alongside his nose.  The committee now retired to the audience, and
the performer led the medium to a seat behind the table.

Now, while the manager delivered the lengthy lecture, the medium
quietly tilted over the hat of envelopes behind the objects on the
table; and then taking one at a time, opened the envelopes and
removed the cards, arranging the cards on top of each other like a
pack of playing cards.  The lecture lasted long enough for the
medium to complete this task; and as he held the cards in his left
hand, he could now move slightly to the right so that he was pretty
well in view of the spectators.  However, his left hand did not
come into view.

By the time the lecture was completed, the spectators had entirely
forgotten the fact that the manager ever received the hat from the
boy at all.  In fact, next day I noticed from the talk of the
spectators, that they invariably asserted that the hat never left
the boy's hands or their sight.

Now, while the manager held each envelope aloft, the medium had but
to read the top card in his left hand and give the tests in a
dramatic manner.  After the tests, when the tables were set to one
side and a cabinet erected, an assistant out of view received the
cards from the medium's left hand; and then while behind the
scenes, replaced them in envelopes, sealed them, and then exchanged
these for the "dummy" envelopes on the small table.  After the
entertainment the manager placed the originals (now again sealed)
near the front of the stage for the writers to take and keep as
souvenirs if they should so desire.

It is evident that this method could be varied a little.  For
instance, when the manager holds the envelope aloft, the medium
could first read it and carefully describe the writing.  He could
then ask for the envelope, so as to become en rapport with the
writer, in order that he may give the correct answer.  In this case
he could leave the surplus cards on the back of the table behind
the music box, and have in his left palm only the single card he is
reading.  When he receives the envelope he should place it in his
left hand directly over the card and tear off the end of the
envelope.  He should then apparently take out the card from the
envelope, but in reality take the original card from the rear of
the envelope with his right hand.  He should then with his right
hand press this card on top of his head and give the answer, while
his left hand lays the opened envelope on the table or music box.
In this case, as soon as he answers the question, he should return
the card to the manager with his right hand and ask the manager to
have some boy run with it to its writer.  After it is returned to
its writer, the manager can hold aloft another envelope and the
medium continue with the tests.  After the tests, the manager
should remove the torn envelopes, as they contain "dummy" cards.

I will now explain the method pursued on the second evening.  After
the questions were written and sealed, the manager went among the
spectators collecting the envelopes in a cloth bag.  He first
numbered the envelopes, at the same time instructing each spectator
to remember his number, after which the envelopes were dropped into
the bag.  When all the envelopes were collected, the manager lifted
the bag in the tips of his fingers and ascended to the stage with
it in plain view.  He quickly attached it to the cord and drew it
up to the ceiling.  So far all was fair; but just at this moment a
person in the rear of the hall made the statement that he desired
to place his envelope in the bag also.  The performer asked a
gentleman on the floor to take the bag, which he now lowered and
detached, and to kindly go to the gentleman and get his envelope.
While he was doing this the manager held the audience by his
discourse.  The two gentlemen were, of course, paid confederates;
and when they met behind the spectators, they merely exchanged the
first bag for a duplicate under the coat of the rear confederate,
who then slipped around behind the stage with the original.

When the other confederate returned to the stage with the duplicate
bag and handed it to the manager he ran this one up to the ceiling.
This method can be varied by the manager making the exchange under
his own coat in the first place when in the rear of the hall after
collecting the envelopes.

Meanwhile an assistant behind the scenes opened and copied the
questions neatly on a sheet of paper, and NUMBERED EACH ONE.  As he
did this he slipped each one into a duplicate envelope, which was
also numbered by the manager with a ring drawn around the figure.
This he sealed.  As soon as all were copied this assistant
carefully drew the medium's Bible just out of sight from the table
near the flies where it rested, inserted the sheet containing the
copied questions, and pushed it back into view again.

During this time the medium was walking slowly about at the front
of the stage while the manager delivered his lecture.  At the close
of the lecture the medium stepped back to the table where he had
laid his Bible a short time before, picked it up and came forward
taking a seat facing the audience.  He next opened the Bible and
turned the leaves over slowly, passing the sheet of paper and
reading and memorizing the first question quickly.  He then turned
the leaves beyond this sheet of paper and finally selected a verse
and began reading it impressively.  As he read this verse he
allowed the Bible to tilt forward sufficiently for the spectators
to see that there was nothing like a loose sheet in it, should such
an idea occur to anyone.

As he had turned over other pages after secretly reading the
question, the sheet was hidden from view.  After reading the verse
he allowed the Bible to close, and then closing his eyes gave the
test for number one.  After this he again opened the Bible and
turned the leaves through it slowly, read the second question
secretly, and finally found a second verse, which he proceeded to
read in a solemn tone, he then gave a second test, and so continued
until all the tests were given.  He then lay down very much
exhausted, and the manager lowered the cloth bag containing the
dummy envelopes, and emptied them upon a small table near the front
of the stage.  He then stepped to the rear of the stage and picked
up a little wicker basket, into which he scooped the dummy
envelopes from the small table where they lay in full view.  He now
descended and rapidly returned the unopened envelopes to their
respective writers.

The basket is what is known as a "Billet changing basket."  It is
lined with red satin and is a small affair with straight sloping
sides.  It has a handle which, when down, locks two flaps up
against the sides of the basket.  This is done by two little
projections on the base ends of the handle.  They are of wire and
are bent into such shape that they project downward when the handle
is down, and hold the two side flaps up against the sides.  These
flaps are of pasteboard, and are covered with red satin the same as
the basket lining.  There is a spring in each flap which closes it
upon the bottom of the basket when it is released by raising the
handle.  Envelopes in the bottom of the basket are thus hidden and
retained, when the flaps are released, and the duplicates drop into
the basket, from the sides where they were concealed by the flaps.

This basket can be supplied by the conjuring depots, or it can
easily be made.  The handle can be made of wire and wrapped with
raffia grass which is on sale at the department stores.  A
pasteboard lining covered with red satin must first be sewed into
the basket, and then two flaps of pasteboard should be hinged to a
pasteboard bottom by pasting on a hinge of cloth.  A suitable
spring can be made of spring wire and sewed into position, after
which this is all covered with red satin and placed in the basket.
The basket should have sides about four inches high, and the bottom
should measure about seven and one-half by ten inches.  The sides
and ends slope outward, and the basket is open wicker work.
Suitable bows of ribbon on the ends of the handle and corners of
the basket conceal the mechanism.

In the present instance, the assistant behind the scenes, after
reading and placing the questions in duplicate envelopes which the
manager had previously numbered, sealed them and placed them in the
sides of the basket, bent up the flaps into position, and lowered
the handle locking them in place.  He now pushed this basket into
view on a table at the rear of the stage; and when the manager was
ready to return the envelopes, he scooped the dummy envelopes from
the table (where they lay after the bag was emptied) into this
basket.  He then lifted the handle which released the flaps,
covered up the dummy envelopes and dropped the originals into view.
These he took down and quickly distributed to the writers.  Being
numbered, this could be quickly done.

          .          .          .          .          .

I will now describe the method employed on the third evening.  This
time dummy envelopes were placed in the sides of the basket, and
the handle left in a lowered position while the operator gathered
up the envelopes.  As the manager returned to the stage he took the
basket by the handle.  This released the dummy envelopes, and
covered up the originals retaining them.  He emptied the dummy
envelopes upon the small table and then laid the basket on a table
near the flies in the rear, and rather out of view.  An assistant
behind the scenes took out the original envelopes, opened them, and
as he read the questions repeated them into a small telephone.  The
wires from this telephone ran under the stage carpet to a pair of
metal plates with a tack in the center of each plate which pointed
upward.  These plates were located under certain spots in the
carpet and directly in front of the medium's chair.  There were
also two other pairs of wires leading to two other positions on the
stage.  The medium was dressed as a "Mahatma" on this evening,
wearing a large turban.  A large tassel dangled by his left ear,
completely concealing a small "watch-case receiver" which was
attached to this ear.  Two tiny wires led from this receiver,
inside his collar, down his person, and were connected inside his
shoes to other wires which penetrated the soles of his shoes.
These latter wires were soldered to copper plates which were tacked
into position on his shoe soles.  He now took his position in the
chair and placed his feet over the hidden tacks, which now
contacted his shoe plates, completing the circuit, so that anything
whispered into the telephone on the stage was repeated in his ear.
He then gave a few tests, tapping his spirit bell, which was a
signal for more information from the assistant.

He soon grew nervous and walked away giving a test as he walked.
He now paused in a certain position for a moment, placing his hand
to his head as if somewhat dazed and tapping his bell.  In this
position his feet were again over two concealed tacks, and he again
secured information for another test, which he gave as he walked
about.  He now paused in a third position and gave another test,
after which he returned to the chair, continuing his work.  This
maneuvering he kept up until all the tests were given; after which
he fell upon a couch exhausted, but with his feet from the
spectators.

The manager now stepped to the rear of the stage and took the
basket, which was now in place containing the original (?)
envelopes behind the flaps; and stepping to the small table he
scooped in the dummy envelopes; then taking the basket by the
handles, he stepped down the runway and rapidly returned the
unopened (?) envelopes to their writers.  The assistant had, of
course, sealed the questions in duplicate envelopes previously
numbered by the manager.  He had placed these behind the flaps, and
shoved the basket into view on a table at the rear of the stage.


I use a variation of these tricks in my double parlors.  I have
made a "billet changing basket" as above described, and have also
made a similar basket except that it contains no mechanism.

I pass cards and envelopes to the spectators in the front parlor.
When the questions are written and sealed in the envelopes, I
gather them up in the mechanical basket; I step to a table in the
rear parlor and apparently empty them upon it.  In reality, I have
just raised the handle so that the originals are retained, and the
dummy envelopes are emptied on the table instead.

I now step to an adjoining room for an instant, to get a small
decorated screen.  I secretly leave the basket containing the
original envelopes in this room and return with the other basket in
my hand in its place.  I place the small ornamental screen on the
table back of the envelopes, but leave the envelopes in view and
request the spectators to notice that I do not go near them until I
get ready to give the tests.  I now carelessly lay the non-
mechanical basket on a table in the room where the spectators are
and proceed with some other tricks.

Usually I give the series of experiments described in the chapter
entitled "Mediumistic Reading of Sealed Writings."  I state to the
spectators that I will not give the tests for the sealed envelopes
until later in the evening.

Meanwhile, should anyone think of such a thing, he can easily
examine the little basket, which he thinks I have just used; as it
still lies on the table in the front parlor with other discarded
paraphernalia, including slates, etc.  I use no assistant; so after
a time has elapsed, and when by the performance of other sealed
readings, suspicion has been diverted from the tests with the
billets, my wife retires on some trifling errand.  While out, she
opens the envelopes in the basket, prepares the sheet of questions,
and places it in the Bible; then she re-seals the questions in
envelopes previously marked by me, places them in the sides of the
basket, raises the flaps and lowers the handle.  She then usually
enters with some light refreshments for the spectators, which
explains her absence with a word.

I continue with other experiments for ten or fifteen minutes after
her return; then I gather up my surplus paraphernalia, including
the dummy basket, and carry all to the room adjoining the back
parlor, where I leave it.  I return instantly with the mechanical
basket which I place near my own table; and then I give another
experiment of some kind.

I now pick up the basket and announce that I have decided to return
to their writers the envelopes on the table in front of the screen
before attempting to give the tests.  I do this as if it were a
later notion.  I now scoop in the dummy envelopes, and raise the
handle, which action covers them up and releases the originals (now
sealed).  I now distribute to the writers their envelopes, which I
can do, as they are numbered as described earlier in this chapter.
I request each sitter to hold his envelope until I shall give his
test.  Then I usually perform some other little experiment before
giving the tests.

I now take up my Bible, which I will stake I brought into the room,
unnoticed, when I returned with the last basket.  I then seat
myself and leisurely turn the leaves through the Bible, reading
verses, and giving the tests as before described.

I always first read a question secretly, and then turn by the sheet
of paper and begin reading a verse of Scripture.  As I do this I
permit the front of the Bible to lower enough for the spectators to
see the printed pages.  This prevents suspicion.  Meanwhile, the
spectators have forgotten that I ever stepped from the room at all
with the basket, and even that my wife retired for some
refreshments.  Neither did they notice the Bible when I brought it
in.

The effect on each person, as I call him by name and describe the
"influence" of his "dear one," giving names and most marvelous
information, is far superior to what it would be were I merely to
read the questions literally, and give the answers.



SOME FAMOUS EXPOSURES


Probably the greatest swindle ever perpetrated in the name of
spiritualism was recently brought to light in Stockton, California.
The medium and his confederates materialized everything from frogs
and small fish to a huge bowlder of gold quartz weighing several
hundred pounds.  This latter had to be brought from the mountains
with a mule team.

The materializing was done through sliding panels in the walls,
while the believers sat holding hands about the opposite side of a
table, and loudly singing sacred hymns.  They had the only door to
the room locked and sealed, and never dreamed that the spirits who
brought the quartz from the mine were mules.

Thousands of dollars were invested in this "spirit mine," the
believers stacking their money on the quartz as it lay on the table
at a dark seance, and receiving deeds in return for their money,
which the spirits dematerialized.

The medium established, or had his spirits establish, a "Treasury
of Heaven," for the faithful to deposit their money in, and on
which they were to receive fifty per cent interest.  This interest
the believers continued to receive at dark seances from the spirits
for a time.  Each sitter's interest was found on the table stacked
in front of him when the lights were lighted.  When the spirit bank
became insolvent and the chief medium disappeared, the believers
were out about thirty-five thousand dollars.

No less a personage than a millionaire of Tacoma, Washington, is
said to have contributed largely to this spirit fund.  I had known
of this case for some time before the exposure (conducted by a
performer engaged for the purpose), and knew that certain
interested persons were contemplating bringing it about, in order
to rescue certain estimable persons from the clutches of these
mediums.  This was successful; and the confederates of the medium
signed written confessions in the presence of one of the most
devout of the believers, and a gentleman who is otherwise very
intelligent.  Upon this the gentleman was greatly crestfallen, but
he still insists that there are certain mediums who are not
impostors; and that certain mediums in Chicago who produce spirit
portraits are genuine.

A full and very interesting account of this exposure is given in
the San Francisco Examiner of March 3 and 4, 1907.

          .          .          .          .          .

I could report enough cases of materialization to fill a volume.
These I know of, from various sources, and in every case they were
invariably fraudulent.  I will give a short account of a
materialization which a very expert medium, who is on friendly
terms with me, witnessed.  The gentleman was originally a minister,
and afterwards began investigating spiritualism, as he was a
believer in it.  He hoped to become a medium; and at one time paid
two lady mediums of some renown, who reside in Chicago, three
dollars a sitting for three sittings a week.  These sittings were
conducted for the purpose of developing this gentleman in
mediumship.  He continued this for a long time, but he was no
nearer to being a medium than he was in the beginning.

At one time he detected one of the sisters passing a slate to the
other, and substituting another in its place.  He saw the edge of
one of the slates protruding from behind the dress of one of the
sisters.  They never knew they were discovered as he said nothing,
but this "opened his eyes."  After this he investigated everywhere,
and at every opportunity, and grew to be a very expert medium
himself.

Recently, when in Los Angeles, he visited a seance conducted by a
medium who claimed to be a Buddhist priest.  This medium was known
under the name of "The Reverend Swami Mazzininanda."  He had an
altar in his home, constructed something like those in Roman
Catholic churches.  He had various candles and images on this
altar, including an image of Buddha, and also a number of mystical
figures.  It was a great mixture of "fake" Buddhism, Roman
Catholicism, and modern spiritualism.  The medium also wore the
costume of a Buddhist priest at his seances.

This "priest" held services here for the faithful.  He conducted
all in Hindoostani (?), his native tongue.  He chanted, prayed to
Buddha, etc., all in a queer-sounding "gibberish."  Certain
evenings of the week were devoted to "soul-travel," and certain
evenings after the religious services a "Black Chapter" was held.

The gentleman whom I have mentioned attended one of these dark
seances.  He sat with other spectators around the room in perfect
darkness.  The spectators were not required to hold hands, so great
was their faith.  Finally, in the darkness, a queer-looking,
vapory, luminous form floated around in the air and paused in front
of the spectators.  My friend slipped down quietly on his knees,
and gradually worked closer and closer to the luminous form, until
he could detect that the vapor was a kind of luminous "cheese
cloth."  He did not desire to expose this "priest," but he desired
to have the "priest" know that some one had discovered him.  My
friend accordingly took hold of the gauze and gave it a very slight
downward jerk.  He then immediately returned quietly to his seat.

There was an immediate pause in the discourse of the "priest," who
had really been floating this form on the end of a stick.  Everyone
knew that something had happened, but no one but my friend knew
what it was.  The "priest" then said in his slow, peculiar,
eccentric and measured tones, "I have received a very great shock;
and I will be unable to continue further this evening."  The next
day, when in conversation with some of the "faithful," this
"priest" stated in his peculiar manner of speaking, and with
intense earnestness, that which follows: "Last night I received a
very great shock.  I was just in the middle of the 'Dark Chapter'
and the spirit of the Master, Krishna, was out.  Having spent the
greater portion of my life on the Himalayas, my right eye has
become injured by the snows."  Then pointing to his right eye, he
added, "My right eye has a defect in it which you cannot see; but
on account of that, I can only see in the dark with it.  I
immediately turned my right eye downward and I looked!  I
distinctly saw a lady's hand reached out toward my robe in the
darkness, and this hand took hold of it and jerked it lightly just
like this."  The "Reverend Swami" here illustrated, by slightly
jerking his coat downward.  It was very amusing to hear him, in
great seriousness, relate this in his low and measured accents to
his faithful followers.

Shortly after this, when the Los Angeles Herald was conducting a
crusade against the numerous mediums of that city, and when it had
an exhibit in its windows of the confiscated material of some of
them, this "Buddhist priest" was arrested and imprisoned for some
of his practices.



Hereward Carrington

More Tricks of "Spiritualists"


"MATTER THROUGH MATTER"


There is one very clever "test" that is sometimes performed which
would seem to show that something of this sort IS accomplished.  It
is, however, nothing more than an ingenious trick, and this might
be a good time to explain its modus operandi.  The general effect
of the illusion is this: The medium requests some one to assist him
in an experiment in which he is going to attempt to pass "matter
through matter."  As the test is one in which a confederate might
easily be employed, he is very careful to choose some person who is
well known, or whose character is above all suspicion.  If this
were not so, the entire effect of the test would be lost upon the
investigators.  Having secured his assistant, he hands him, for
examination, a solid steel ring, just large enough to slip on and
off the hand and arm easily.  The ring is perfectly solid, and may
be examined by anyone desirous of doing so.  When this part of the
performance is finished, the medium and his sitter then join or
clasp their right hands (as in handshaking), and the sitter is
instructed not to release the hand for a single instant.  To "make
assurance doubly sure," however, the hands are fastened together in
any way the sitters may desire; the hands being tied together with
tape, e. g., and the ends of this tape tied and the knots sealed.
The tape connects the wrists and the hands of the medium and his
sitter, and this tying may be made as secure as possible.  A piece
of thick cloth is now thrown over the two hands and the lower part
of the arms, concealing them from view.  With his disengaged hand
the medium now takes the iron ring and passes it up under the
cloth, so as to bring it in contact with his own arm.  He holds it
there for some time, but ultimately snatches off the covering
cloth, and reveals to the eyes of the astonished audience the ring-
-now encircling his own arm--in spite of the fact that the ties are
still in statu quo, and the sitter never let go his hold for an
instant.  The ties and the ring may again be examined, if desired,
before the hands are separated.

This is an exceedingly effective test, and has every appearance of
being genuine--indeed, it is hard to see where trickery can come
in.  The trick is one of the simplest imaginable, however, and is
performed in the following manner:

The medium has provided himself with TWO rings exactly alike; one
of these the audience is free to examine, the other the medium is
wearing on his right arm, under his coat.  When the two hands are
clasped together, therefore, it is a simple thing for the medium,
under cover of the enveloping cloth, to slip the duplicate ring
down his sleeve, and on to his own hand, and that part of the
"miracle" is accomplished!  It remains only to explain what becomes
of the first ring.  The cloth thrown over the arms is very thick
and stiff, as stated, and the inner side of this contains a double
partition, or sort of bag, into which the medium slips the
duplicate ring.  The cloth may now be shown on both sides, without
disclosing the ring, and the medium makes away with it as soon as
possible, in order to avoid detection.



DECEPTION EXPLAINED BY THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY


The object [of this passage] is to enable the reader to see, more
easily, how it is that the watchful observer is deceived into
believing that a thing is so, when in reality it is not, and vice
versa; and also to give an idea of the various methods employed by
the medium in order to accomplish his results.

I must first of all call the reader's attention to one or two rules
which every conjurer learns at the commencement of his study, and
which he learns to apply so constantly that it becomes second
nature to him.  The first is: Never let the eyes rest on the hand
that is performing the "sleight," but always on the other hand, or
on some object on the table or elsewhere, as this will have a
tendency to draw the eyes of the audience to that point also.  The
sitters or audience will always look at the point closely watched
by the magician--their eyes have a tendency to follow his, and
wherever he looks, there will the onlooker look also.  Needless to
say, the magician makes use of this fact, and many tricks and
illusions are dependent upon it for their successful ac-
complishment.  Whenever the magician or medium looks intently at
one hand, therefore, the OTHER hand should be watched, as it is a
sure sign that THAT is the hand which is performing the trick.

Another fundamental rule that is observed by all sleight-of-hand
performers is: Never to let an audience know beforehand what is to
be done; i. e., the nature of the trick that it is intended to
perform.  If the spectator knew what was forthcoming, he would be
on the lookout for movements of the performer at certain critical
times--just at the periods when close observation is least wanted--
and would quite possibly detect the performer in the act of
executing certain movements which would show how the trick was
performed.  But not knowing what is coming, the spectator is unable
to watch closely at the critical moment--not knowing what that
moment is--and so is unable to detect the trick, his attention
being diverted by the performer, just before this movement is made,
to some other object or movement.

The methods of diverting the spectator's attention are various.
There is the use of the eyes, as before shown.  Then there is the
spoken word, the performer telling the onlookers to observe some
certain object or action, and the effect is to cause them to watch
it, as they are told.  They follow the line of least resistance.
The combined effect upon the spectator of the spoken word and the
eyes together is generally irresistible.

Another important factor is this: A performer should always let any
suggestion, right or wrong, soak well into the spectator's mind
before attempting to change it.  This is for two reasons.  In the
first place, if the suggestion is correct, if, e. g., the performer
really DOES place an object in his left hand, and it is shortly
found to have vanished from that hand, he is annoyed by hearing
some one say that he was not really sure it was there in the first
place, as "it was covered up so quickly."  If, on the other hand,
the suggestion given was a false one, if, e. g., the performer says
he has placed an object in his left hand, when, in reality, he has
not done so but has palmed it in the right, then it is still
necessary to allow a certain time-interval to elapse between the
performing of the action which apparently placed the object in the
hand, and the showing of the hand empty, for this reason.  If the
hand into which the object is supposedly placed is IMMEDIATELY
shown empty, the natural conclusion of the sitter is that the
object was not in reality placed there at all, but was retained in
the other hand, which would be the fact.  If, however, the
performer allowed some time to elapse, between the action of
placing the object in that hand (supposedly) and the showing of the
hand empty, he, meanwhile, keeping his eyes fixed on the hand,
suggesting to the sitters that the object IS there, and in every
way acting as if it WERE there, the idea will gradually gain a firm
hold on the minds of the spectators that the object is there, in
reality, and they are correspondingly surprised to find it
ultimately vanished.  It is just such a knowledge of "the way
people's minds work," as a friend once said to me, which enables
the conjurer to deceive the public; and it is precisely the same
cast of mind that the medium possesses.  He is, in fact, a good
judge of human nature.

Another fact that must be borne in mind is that, when once a
spectator has seen a movement made two or three times in the same
manner, he frequently "sees" the performer make that movement on
another occasion, when the performer had, in reality, only STARTED
to make the movement, and suggested the rest.  Thus, if the
performer throws a ball up into the air two or three times in
succession, and on the fourth occasion merely pretends to throw it
up, really retaining it in the other hand, the great majority of
the spectators will really "see" the ball ascend into the air on
the fourth occasion, and will so state, on being asked.  We here
depend upon association and habit.[1]


[1] A very similar illusion is mentioned by Professor Hyslop, v.
Borderland of Psychical Research, Pp. 228-9, in which pellets were
apparently placed in a box, really being palmed in the medium's
hand.


Professor Jastrow summed up this portion of the psychology of
deception very well when he said:[1]


[1] Fact and Fable in Psychology, pp. 124-5.


"He (the conjurer) must dissociate the natural factors of his
habits, actually attending to one thing while seemingly attending
to another; at the same time his eyes and his gestures and his
'patter' misdirect the attention to what is apparently the
essential field of operation, but really only a blind to distract
attention away from the true scene of action.  The conjurer directs
your attention to what he does not do; he does not do what he
pretends to do; and to what he actually does, he is careful neither
to appear to direct his own attention nor to arouse yours."

Prof. Max Dessoir, in a very fine article on "The Psychology of
Conjuring," writes as follows: "By awakening interest in some
unimportant detail, the conjurer concentrates that attention on
some false point, or negatively, diverts it from the main object,
and we all know the senses of an inattentive person are pretty
dull. . . .  When causing the disappearance of some object, the
conjurer counts one, two, three; the object must really disappear
before three, not at three, because, the attention of the public
being diverted to three, they do not notice what happens at one and
two. . . .  A specially successful method of diversion is founded
on the human craze for imitation. . . .  The conjurer counts on
this in many cases.  He always looks in the direction where he
wants the attention of the public, and does everything himself
which he wants the public to do. . . .  If the trick is in the left
hand, the conjurer turns sharply to the person to his right,
presuming correctly that the spectators will make the same
movement, and will not notice what is going on in the left hand. . . .
Every sharp, short remark will, for a moment, at least, divert
the eyes from the hands and direct them to the mouth, according to
the above-mentioned law of imitation."

The successful conjurer has carefully studied beforehand every
movement that is made--every word that is spoken--during a
conjuring performance, and has seen that these all fit naturally
into place, and help conceal the real workings of the trick.  The
right and left hands must be trained to operate independently, and
without the need of looking at either.  Many conjurers practice
doing two separate things at the same time, one with either hand;
and the ability to do this is essential.  Above all, the performer
must be full of conscious self-possession, and feel himself to be
master of the situation, no less than to feel the ability to cope
with any emergencies that may arise.

Turning, now, to a consideration of the seance, we find that many
of these psychological rules still hold good, and their operation
enables the medium to perform many actions which would otherwise be
impossible.  A certain suggestion is given to the sitters, and
imagination and inference do the rest.  "Our conclusions as to what
we see or hear are always founded on a combination of observation
and inference; but in daily life it is seldom necessary to
distinguish between the two elements, since, when the object and
its mode of presentation are familiar, our inferences are generally
correct.  But it is different when, owing to circumstances, such as
a bad light, we have to infer more in proportion to what we
perceive than usual; or when some one, e. g., a conjurer or a
ventriloquist, is trying to deceive us by presenting one object
under the familiar aspect of another, and suggesting false
inferences.  It is not uncommon to find people at seances
encouraging each other in the belief that they see, say, a living
human figure, when all that they actually SEE is something moving
which is about the size of a human being; the rest is inference."
How true these last remarks are is demonstrated by the statement,
made in The Revelations of a Spirit Medium, that an old wire mask
frequently used at materializing seances had been recognized "by
dozens of persons as fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, cousins,
sweethearts, wives, husbands, and various other relatives and
friends.  None but the medium knew that it was only a fifty-cent
wire mask, hence none but the medium could enjoy the humor of the
occasion."

One of the most instructive incidents I know, in relation to this
question of the psychology of deception, is the one given by Doctor
Hodgson[1]--the case of the officer and the Hindu juggler.  In this
case, a trick was performed before an English officer and his wife,
and Doctor Hodgson happened to overhear this officer telling some
travelers of the experience at dinner that evening.  "Referring to
the movements of the coins, he said that he had taken a coin from
his own pocket and placed it on the ground himself, yet that this
coin had indulged in the same freaks as the other coins.  His wife
ventured to suggest that the juggler had taken the coin and placed
it on the ground, but the officer was emphatic in repeating his
statement, and appealed to me for confirmation.  He was, however,
mistaken.  I had watched the transaction with special curiosity, as
I knew what was necessary for the performance of the trick.  The
officer had apparently intended to place the coin upon the ground
himself, but as he was doing so, the juggler leaned slightly
forward, dexterously and in a most unobtrusive manner received the
coin from the fingers of the officer, as the latter was stooping
down, and laid it close to the others.  If the juggler had not thus
taken the coin, but had allowed the officer himself to place it on
the ground, the trick, as actually performed, would have been
frustrated.


[1] Proceedings Society for Psychical Research, Vol. IV., pp. 385-6.


"Now I think it highly improbable that the movement of the juggler
entirely escaped the perception of the officer; highly improbable,
that is to say, that the officer was absolutely unaware of the
juggler's action at the moment of its happening; but I suppose
that, although an impression was made on his consciousness, it was
so slight as to be speedily effaced by the officer's IMAGINATION of
himself as stooping and placing the coin upon the ground.  The
officer, I may say, had obtained no insight into the modus operandi
of the trick, and his fundamental misrepresentation of the only
patent occurrence that might have given him a clew to its
performance debarred him completely from afterwards, on reflection,
arriving at any explanation.  Just similarly, many an honest
witness may have described himself as having placed one slate upon
another at a sitting with a medium, whereas it was the medium who
did so, and who possibly effected at the same time one or two other
operations altogether unnoticed by the witness."

In reading through descriptions of slate-writing seances, we very
seldom find the statement made as to WHO placed the slates on the
table, or under the table, etc., generally the account reading "the
slates were then placed on the table," without any qualifying
statement as to WHO placed them there.  Accounts of this kind are
absolutely worthless, from an evidential standpoint.  We must at
once ask ourselves: who placed the slates in that position? and if
it was the medium--as it probably was in the vast majority of
instances--then that test, in all probability, ceases to have any
evidential weight.  Anyone can read over a number of accounts of
slate-writing performances, and verify these statements, if he
chooses to do so.  Frequently, the statement is made that the
sitter did actually place the slate on the table, when in reality
the medium did so.  This error is quite unconscious on the sitter's
part, of course, but the account is falsified, nevertheless.
Mistakes of this kind are very common, the sitter thinking
afterwards that he (the sitter) MUST have placed the slates on the
table himself!

It will be seen from the above that there is a great difference
between what ACTUALLY transpired, at any given seance, and what the
accounts SAY transpired.  The general public cannot get that all-
important fact too strongly rooted in its mind: that the events
which transpired at a seance may not be reported accurately, so
that the report of the seance may be altogether wrong and
erroneous, though the sitters, and those who drew up the report,
may have been thoroughly honest in their belief that the report is
accurate in every respect.  The effect of all this is very great
indeed.  Many spiritualistic seances are quite inexplicable AS DE-
SCRIBED, but the description is not a true report of what took
place at the seance in question.  The facts are distorted.
Consequently, the person taking it upon himself to explain what
took place at the seance is called upon to explain a number of
things which, in reality, never took place at all.  We must
remember, in this connection, that a number of conjuring tricks, AS
DESCRIBED, would be quite impossible to explain by any process of
trickery.  The description of the trick was not correct.

Let me make this still clearer, and at the same time illustrate the
difference between what apparently occurs, and what actually
happens, by the following example: A conjurer places a coin (say a
quarter) in each hand, and closes his hands.  Another quarter is
now placed upon the fingers of each hand, so that there is now one
quarter in each hand and one-quarter on the fingers of each.  The
magician announces that, by simply opening and closing his hands--
which are held at some distance from each other--he will thereby
transfer one of the coins from one hand to the other, so that there
will be three coins in one of the hands, and only one left in the
other.

Now, if the sitter were writing out an account of what happened, it
would most certainly read as follows:

"The magician then tried the experiment--of opening and closing his
hands rapidly, and causing the coin to be transferred, as promised--
but failed in the attempt, the coins from the back of each hand
falling on to the table in rather a clumsy manner.  They were,
however, again placed upon the backs of the magician's hands; the
movement was repeated, and this time successfully.  The coins
disappeared from the backs of both hands, in one of which was now
found three of the coins, while the other hand contained only one."

Such is precisely the description of the trick, as it would be
given by the average person, on seeing it, and it would represent
his honest opinion of what occurred; as it stands, it is quite
inexplicable by trickery.  Needless to say, the account is NOT a
true statement of what actually occurred, as the following
explanation will make clear:

The first time the coins were dropped on to the table, the movement
was not so "clumsy" as might have been supposed.  It was, in fact,
intentional, being the principal factor in the accomplishment of
the trick.  What ACTUALLY transpired at that time was this: The
magician, by a quick movement, dropped both coins from ONE hand on
to the table, at the same time dexterously opening the other hand a
trifle, and allowing the second coin, on that hand, to fall into
the interior of the hand itself.  Thus, while both hands are still
seen to be closed, one is empty, and the other contains two coins.
It is obvious, therefore, that, when a coin is placed upon each of
the hands again, the magician has only to repeat the opening and
closing movement, and there will be three coins in one of the
hands, and only one in the other.

This trick illustrates, in a very simple and striking manner, the
possibility of reporting a fact in an entirely erroneous manner,
quite unconscious of the fact that this error in reporting has been
committed.  Just in this same manner, are many slate-writing and
other phenomena misreported, and hence an explanation of the
seance, AS REPORTED, is rendered impossible.  The trouble is that
the "report" does not REALLY report what actually occurred.

          .          .          .          .          .

Many of my readers may feel somewhat insulted at this accusation
that they cannot detect such obvious trickery when it exists, and
that they are liable to make such mistakes in recording a seance as
those here mentioned.  They may comfort themselves with the
thought, however, that it is no disgrace to make mistakes and
errors of this kind; for, as Professor Jastrow pointed out:[1]


[1] Fact and Fable in Psychology, p. 148.


"The matter is in some aspects as much a technical acquisition as
in the diagnosticating of a disease.  It is not at all to the
discredit of anyone's powers of observation or intellectual acumen
to be deceived by the performances of a conjurer; and the same
holds true of the professional part of mediumistic phenomena.
Until this homely but salutary truth is impressed with all its
importance upon all intending investigators, there is little hope
of bringing about a proper attitude toward these and kindred
phenomena."

These remarks will make it clear to us why many men of science have
been deceived by very simple tricks and fraudulent devices, while
investigating spiritualistic phenomena--their scientific culture is
no guaranty that they are any more capable of detecting fraud than
is the man-in-the-street--in fact their training has made them very
much LESS capable of detecting fraud than the average person, who
comes more in contact with the world, and is an acuter judge of
character and human nature.



Anonymous

How Spirits Materialize


From "The Revelations of a Spirit Medium"--a book out of existence
now, since the plates and all copies were bought up by
"spiritualists" and destroyed.  The following is given by courtesy
of Mr. Hereward Carrington:


Reader, have you ever attended a "seance" for "full-form
materialization?"  Have you ever thought you had met your dead
relative's spirit at these "seances"?

If you have never had the pleasure of attending a seance of this
"phase" you have missed a rare treat.  The writer has assisted at
many a one and will relate to you some of the wonderful phenomena
occurring at them and the means used to produce them. . . .  There
are hundreds of "materializing mediums" doing business in this
country, who are swelling a good-sized bank account.  Their
business sometimes runs into the hundreds of dollars in a single
week.  This "phase" of mediumship is considered by the spiritual-
ists as the highest possible attainable, and if you are a clever
"full-form medium" your financial welfare is assured. . . .  Many
and various are the methods employed by the different "mediums" in
producing this phase.  It is in Boston, New York, and San Francisco
that it is worked the finest.  The full-form seances most often met
with are very simply worked, and easy of performance by the medium.
You are usually given a seat in a circle of chairs about the front
of a "cabinet" made by hanging heavy curtains across the corner of
the room.  If you are a stranger or one who looks or acts as though
he would "grab" the "spirits," you are seated at the farthest point
from the cabinet; or, if there are two rows of seats, you will be
given a seat in the back row. . . .

I made my way to the "materializing seance," at which my friends
hoped to materialize.  I was admitted to the seance room and found
about twenty persons already assembled.  I was seated in the front
row of chairs.  The cabinet used was a closet about six feet long
and four feet wide.  The ceiling of both the room and the cabinet
was of wood.  After a thorough examination had been made of the
cabinet by all those who cared to do so, the sitters were
rearranged to suit the medium.  There were present now thirty-five
persons.  The seance room was very large.  The door had been taken
off the closet that served as a cabinet, and in its stead were hung
heavy curtains.  The floor of the room was carpeted with a dark
carpet, as was the cabinet.  The light was furnished by a lamp
placed in a box that was fastened to the wall some eight feet from
the floor.  This box had a sliding lid in front, controlled by a
cord passing into the cabinet.  By this means the "spirits" could
regulate the light to suit themselves, without any movement on the
part of any of those in the seance room being necessary.  When
everything was in readiness the medium entered the cabinet, seated
himself and was tied, and so secured to his chair that it was
impossible that he could have any use of himself.  He was most
thoroughly secured to his chair, and his chair nailed fast to the
floor by passing leather straps over the rounds in the side and
nailing the ends to the floor.  After it was shown to the sitters
that he was utterly helpless, the curtain was drawn.  The manager
now placed an ordinary kitchen table in front of the door of the
cabinet, so that it stood away from it about two feet.  The table
contained no drawer.  On the table was laid writing materials, a
guitar, and small bell.  The manager seated himself close to one
side of the cabinet entrance, and started a large Swiss music box.
Before it had finished the first air the lamp was shut entirely
off, making the room inky dark.

An illuminated hand and arm was now seen to come from behind the
curtain, and played an accompaniment to the music box on the
guitar.  We could see plainly the movements of the hand, arm, and
fingers, as it manipulated the strings of the instrument.  It did
not appear necessary to finger the strings on the keyboard,
although the air was in a key that made it impossible to tune the
guitar so that an accompaniment could be performed WITHOUT
fingering.  However, but one hand was visible, and it was picking
the strings.  After the tune was finished, the hand left the in-
strument, and moved out into the room to the front of the table,
and from the sound we knew it was writing on the tablet that had
been placed there.  The arm was of bluish light and appeared to end
just above the elbow, and to have no connection with the body.  It
finished writing and seemed to float into the cabinet near the top.

The light was opened and the manager requested those who had tied
the medium to examine his condition and see if the ropes had been
tampered with.  The examination was made and it was evident that
the fastenings were undisturbed.  The communication was read aloud
to those present, and contained the following:

"We are pleased to meet so many seekers after light and truth here
this evening, and, from the conditions, as we sense them, we will
have a satisfactory and pleasant seance.  The way to obtain the
best results is for each person to maintain a passive condition and
take what we have to give.  You may rest assured that our best
efforts will be put forth to give you entire satisfaction.  The
Control."

The writing was exactly on the ruled lines although written in
absolute darkness.  The hand and arm, although luminous, did not
give out a particle of light.  The arm had been at least five feet
from the cabinet opening and seven feet from the medium.  Surely,
it was not he.  The message read, the light was again shut down and
the music again started.

Once more a hand appeared, and floating out to the table, again
began writing.  Of a sudden the hand disappeared, and, after a few
seconds, I was astonished to feel a hand thrusting a paper into my
top coat pocket.  Now appeared two hands and they played an air on
the guitar.  Now came three, then four hands were visible, bright
as the day.  Two of them began writing again, and, when they had
finished, two more sitters were the recipients of sheets of paper.
Soon the light was opened for an inspection of the cabinet, which
was made, with the conclusion that the medium had not moved.  Those
of us receiving communications were afforded an opportunity to read
them.  We found them nicely written, as before, and all contained
"tests." . . .

After the light went out again, more hands were seen; the table was
floated about over the heads of the circle, as was the music box,
which weighed at least fifty pounds.  Another examination of the
cabinet was made and everything found satisfactory.  This time the
light was not put entirely out, but a very dim light was allowed.

The music box was again set playing, and, while yet it was playing
the first tune, a tall figure, robed in creamy white, with gleaming
sparks in her hair, and on her head a sort of crown, issued from
the cabinet.  She was recognized by a gentleman present, a
spiritualist, whose spirit guide she was, and who addressed her as
"my queen."  She stood a few seconds behind the table and then
stepped out in the open space between the sitters and the table.
The gentleman now arose from his seat and, standing beside her,
holding her hand, conversed in a whisper with her for some seconds.

This was most assuredly a lady, if appearances go for anything.
Her hands were quite small, and were warm and lifelike, as several,
including myself, can testify, having been permitted to shake hands
with her.  At last she started to the cabinet, and, as she went,
appeared to grow shorter, until, as she disappeared between the
curtains, she was not much taller than the table.  The manager now
explained that the spirit had remained out rather too long and came
near dematerializing before she reached the cabinet.  Now came the
spirit of a young man, dressed in a light suit of clothes, who gave
his name and said his mother was present.  She was, and had a few
words of conversation with him when he disappeared into the
cabinet.  The lady said that it was unmistakably her son; but there
was SOMETHING that was not as he had been, but what it was she was
unable to describe.

The next spirit to present itself was my son Eddie.  He came out
from the cabinet calling "Papa, papa."  The manager asked "Who is
your papa?" and he replied, "Mr. (Smith)."  All this time he stood
between the table and the cabinet, and only his head and shoulders
could be seen.  The manager told him to step out where he could be
seen, when he came around to the front of the table.

It was rather dark, but I could swear it was my son.  He was just
the right size, with long flaxen hair and a very pale face.  He
wore a light-colored waist and darker knee-breeches and stockings,
with a large black bow at his throat, Just as I remember seeing him
last in health.

While Eddie was still standing in front of the table a large man
came out and took him by the hand.  Eddie spoke, saying:

"Must I go back, grandpa?"  The form turned toward me, saying:

"My son, this is a great pleasure to us, but we must not long
remain, as it is our first attempt at materializing."  He turned to
go when the manager said to him:

"If the gentleman is your son you ought to give him your name."

"The name of the child is Eddie, and my own is J. A. Smith,"
replied the form, as they vanished into the cabinet.

The manager suggested that it would be well to examine and see
whether the medium had been out or not.  The cabinet was examined
and everything found satisfactory.

Spirit after spirit came from the cabinet, one or two at a time for
an hour; some of them came to friends, and others were "controls"
of the medium.  Many of them were recognized by different ones of
the sitters in the room.  I, for one, could swear to the identity
of my own son Eddie, while my father was plainly recognizable. . . .

The room was again made dark.  Suddenly there appeared on the
floor, in front of the table, a light about as large as a baseball.
It moved about in a circle of perhaps a foot in diameter and grew
larger.  It soon lost the shape of a ball and appeared to be a
luminous cloud.  Seemingly we could see into and through it.  In
the course of thirty seconds it had become as large as a six-year-
old child; still there was no definite shape, only a fleecy
cloudlike mass, turning, twisting, and rolling.  At the end of
perhaps a minute it was the size and shape of an adult person.  The
face could not be seen, but light, luminous spots were visible as
though the hair and ears were decorated with gems.  The shape spoke
and requested light.  As the light was turned on the luminousness
disappeared, and we beheld a beautiful young lady clothed in a
dazzling white costume.  Her arms and shoulders were bare, and
about her neck there was a necklace of what appeared to be very
brilliant diamonds.  Her feet were encased in white slippers, with
straps across the instep.  In her ears and hair glistened and
shimmered beautiful diamonds.  Her face and arms were as alabaster,
and altogether she was one of the most beautiful women I had ever
beheld.  She was recognized by a lady and gentleman present as
their daughter.  They had met her here before.  They were from the
East, and were wealthy.  The spirit requested that they come to
her, which they did, and were each kissed and embraced by it.  They
held a moment's conversation with her and resumed their seats, when
the lamp was slowly turned down.  As the light became dim the
spirit became luminous.  The face and arms disappeared and the body
became as a cloud again, turning and twisting and growing smaller
until it was nothing but a small light spot on the carpet, which of
a sudden disappeared entirely.

Immediately after this manifestation an examination of the medium
and cabinet was made, and it was certain the medium had not been
away from his chair.  The light was again turned out and the music
box started, when TWO bright spots appeared on the carpet, one at
either end of the table.  These went through the same process of
development until, when the light was turned on, there was another
beautiful female spirit at one end of the table, and a child of
perhaps eight years of age at the other.  The child was recognized
by a lady present as her daughter, while the adult spirit was
recognized and rapturously greeted by a gentleman who sat near me
on my left, as his "darling angel guardian."  They had quite a long
conversation, in which they made use of very endearing language,
each to the other.  I supposed it was the gentleman's wife. . . .

The spirits did not disappear as the first one had, but, when the
light had been turned off, the luminous shape revolved a few times,
and on two occasions assumed the garb and shape of men, and when
the light was turned on again, there stood the men with beards and
men's forms.  After some eight or ten of these materializations and
dematerializations, before our eyes, the last couple completely
disappeared.

The light was again turned down and a luminous shape came from the
cabinet, followed by others, until seven of them stood on the
floor.  The light was turned up until we could see the seven
spirits.  Five were females and two males.  They were of different
sizes.  The curtain at the door of the cabinet was pulled aside and
we could see the medium sitting in the chair in which he was bound.
The forms now filed into the cabinet again, while the music box
played.  After they had disappeared the light was turned up, an
investigation made of the cabinet, and the seance was over.


There, reader, is a truthful description of what can be witnessed
at the seances of mediums who are artists.  None of your bungling,
amateur work here.  The work of such a medium is always
satisfactory for the reason that if a man feels SURE that the
medium is a fraud, he has been so well entertained that he does not
regret the money paid for the opportunity to witness it.  This is
the class of medium also who frequently succeed in getting large
sums of money from wealthy persons they have converted to
spiritualism.

Did the writer not give you the true explanation of the manner in
which these things were produced, you would probably say it was
conceived by a very fertile imagination.  If you believed that he
saw these things you would perhaps offer the preacher's
explanation, by saying, "it is the work of the devil"; or that of
the scientist, by asserting that "it is the mesmerist's power over
your mind"; or "the operator has discovered an odd force in
nature"; or go off on a long dissertation on hypnotism and fourth
dimension of space problems.  However, it is not the work of the
devil, neither are there any but NATURAL laws necessary to its
production.

The seance described actually occurred and was described in writing
by Mr. Smith in the language used, although it was not printed, and
the writer was one of those who assisted in its production.  He
will now proceed to explain this particular seance. . . .

It will be remembered that the room and cabinet were carpeted with
a dark carpet, and that the ceilings were of wood.  The ceilings
were decorated by being put on in panels.  The ceiling of the
cabinet would not have been like that of the room had the closet
been a part of the architect's plans of the house.  It was not, but
was made by the medium.  He simply built a lath and plaster
partition from the corner of a wide chimney to the wall, thus
inclosing a space of six by four feet.  The panel in the ceiling of
the closet was twenty inches square.  This panel was "doctored" and
could be displaced, leaving an aperture large enough for the
"spooks" to get through with perfect ease.  A light ladder which
reached within three feet of the floor of the cabinet was hooked
fast above and furnished the means of getting down and up again.
There were eight persons connected with the seance described by Mr.
Smith, seven upstairs and the medium in the cabinet.  Of course it
was not necessary that the medium get out of his fastenings, and
the facts are that he did NOT.  The table was placed across the
cabinet door, not to lay the instruments on, but to be very much in
the way should anyone make a rush and "grab" for the materialized
forms.  In case this occurred, the "spooks" above would close the
light, making the room perfectly dark, and the manager would do his
utmost to turn the table on end, or side, with the legs out in the
room.  Before the "grabber" could get the lay of things and get
past it, the spooks would have gone through the trap, closed it,
pulled up the ladder, and the "grabber" would have found the medium
writhing and groaning and bleeding from the mouth.  The bleeding
was for effect, and was caused by sucking very hard on his teeth or
gums.

The table also served a convenient purpose in the materialization
and dematerialization through the floor.  You now know where the
spooks came from, in this particular house, and how they got in and
out.  Now let us see how they managed the materializations, and the
properties used to produce them.  The trap and ladder were
practically noiseless in their operations, but the music box made
assurance doubly sure that the least sound from the cabinet should
not he heard in the seance room.

When the box began its first air the trapdoor was opened and down
the ladder came a young man clad in a suit of black tights.  He was
entirely covered with black with the exception of his right arm,
which was bare to a point a little more than halfway from the elbow
to his shoulder.  The bare arm glowed with a luminous bluish light.

This condition of things was brought about by powdering his arm
with pulverized luminous paint.  If you are not told the method of
transforming the sticky paint to powder, you will not be able to do
it, and will conclude the writer was romancing in this case.  The
most essential thing to you will be to know where you can procure
this paint.  The writer has been unable to procure it anywhere,
except of Devoe & Co., of New York City.  It is put up in a package
resembling six-ounce jelly glasses, and you will get six of them
for five dollars.  In order to reduce it to powder, thin the
contents of one of the glasses with one pint of turpentine.  When
it is thoroughly cut and incorporated into the turpentine, soak
strips of muslin in it and hang them out to dry.  When thoroughly
dry you can shake the powder from the cloth.  In order to powder
one of your arms, gather one of the cloths in your hands, and use
it as a powder puff on your arm.  You will not be able to get all
the paint out, but the pieces will make luminous crowns, slippers,
stars, and luminous decorations for your robes.  You will be under
the necessity of perfuming your robes each time they are used, for
the odor of the turpentine will always remain to a greater or less
degree.  To illuminate a robe or costume (the mediums always say
"robe") you proceed the same as in the powdering process, except
that to the pint of paint you will add a wineglass full of Demar
varnish, which will prevent its falling or being shaken off as
powder.  You are not to make the robe of muslin, but of white
netting.  Every lady will know what netting is.  It is the
lightest, thinnest material the writer ever saw sold in a dry goods
store.  Ten yards of it can be put into the vest pocket.  Do not
scrimp the material, but get as much of it into your robe as
possible.

When he of the luminous arm steps from the cabinet into the dark
room no part of him is visible save the arm.  He picks the strings
of the instrument with the illuminated hand and fingers the
keyboard with the other.  He makes a sound of writing on the tablet
and tears off a leaf which he conceals, and, drawing a long black
stocking over the luminous arm, places in the pocket of the sitter
a communication that has been written upstairs in a good light.
This accounts for the even, beautiful writing, supposed to have
been done in the dark.  He covers the luminous arm so that anyone
so inclined could not locate it in order to "grab" when he is near
enough.  By mounting the table, that luminous hand and arm can be
made to show as though it was floating about near the ceiling.

When four hands were visible there were two spooks at work with
both arms illuminated. . . .  You can readily understand the forces
that floated the music box and table above the heads of the
sitters, and an explanation is useless.

When the first female spirit appeared it was, in reality, a young
woman, dressed in a gorgeous white costume without paint, hence the
light was turned up instead of down, in order that she be visible.
Rhinestones and Sumatra gems being cheap, she was plentifully
supplied with "diamonds," although many of those who are the queens
or spirit guides or "controls" of wealthy spiritualistic fanatics
wear real diamonds, the gift of their wealthy charge, or "king" as
they usually call him.

When she started for the cabinet she used her hands to keep her
robe from under her feet, and as she went stooped lower and lower,
until, as she disappeared in the cabinet, she went on her hands and
knees.  This is what caused the appearance of "dematerialization."

When Mr. Smith's son, Eddie, came from the cabinet, he was
represented by a boy of about eight years of age, the son of one of
the female "spooks" upstairs.  He receives two dollars a night for
his services, the same as the larger spooks.  He was powdered until
he was very white, a blond wig put over his own hair, and dressed
as most boys are at the age Mr. Smith's son died.  Mr. Smith
recognized him by his size, his light complexion, and flaxen hair,
and the fact that he called him "papa" and gave his correct name.
His father was "made up" from the description given by the medium,
and acknowledged by Mr. Smith as correct.  Of course he knew his
own name, for it was given him by the slate-writer. . . .

We now come to a part of the phenomena that all spiritualists who
have witnessed it will swear by.  What is referred to is the
materializing and dematerializing of the spirit from the floor and
before your eyes.  In this you see first a small light, which grows
larger and larger, until there stands before you a fully formed
female or male spirit, as was described in Mr. Smith's experience.

In order to accomplish what he witnessed, the same spook who had
before been recognized by a gentleman as "his queen," prepared
herself in the following way: Divesting herself of all clothing she
donned simply a long chemise that reached her shoe tops.  She drew
on a pair of white stockings, and over them a pair of white
slippers.  Into her hair and ears she put rhinestone diamonds, and
around her neck a necklace of the same beautiful but valueless
stones.  On each ear lobe and around her neck were put small spots
of the luminous powder to represent the diamonds while it was dark.
Her face was powdered and her eyebrows and eyelashes darkened,
while a dark line was drawn under each eye.  She now took a black
mask that covered her head, and her "robe" in her hands, and went
down to the cabinet.  Arriving there, she put the black mask over
her head, to prevent the luminous diamonds being seen until the
proper time.  She carried her robe in a black bag.  Crawling from
between the curtains and under the table, she exposed on the floor
a small part of her robe.  This she shook and moved about, allowing
it to escape from the bag until it was all out.  She was now from
under the table and on her knees, and it was time the head show on
the form, so, getting close to the robe, she threw off and under
the table the black mask.  The shape was now the size of an adult;
she adjusted the robe to her person, and rapped for light.  As a
matter of course, when any light was made the luminousness of the
robe was drowned, and she appeared in simply a white costume.  The
necklace and eardrops could now be seen, but when the light was
such as to reveal them, the luminous spots had disappeared, leaving
the spectator to think the ones he now saw were the ones he had
seen in the dark.  The process of dematerialization will now be
apparent, and a description will only tire the reader.  One small
spook was all that was required, as he could be made to represent
boy or girl as was desired, by clothing him in the garments of
either sex.

At the close of the seance, the full force of "spooks" came into
the room.  After disappearing, they shinned up the ladder, drew it
after them, closed the panel and the trap in the floor above it,
replaced the carpet and pushed over the place a heavy bedstead from
which they took the castors.  They now carried the ladder
downstairs and concealed it in the coal house as they went through
it on their way home.  They will get their pay next day.

Should ever so close an examination of the cabinet be made, you
would not find anything wrong.  This particular medium has taken
investigators into the cellar beneath the cabinet, and the room
above it, scores of times, yet nothing was discovered.

You are not always to search for the trap in the ceiling, nor yet
in the floor.  A trap is not possible in the ceiling except a
closet is used as "cabinet," and the ceiling is of wood.  Where
this condition of things does not exist, you must search elsewhere.
The floor is a very likely place when it cannot be made in the
ceiling.  If you do not find it there, examine the base or
mopboard.  If it is in the mopboard you will find, upon
examination, that there is a joint in it near the corner of the
cabinet, but you will find it solidly nailed with about four nails
each side of the joint.  This appearance of extraordinary solidity
will be absolute proof that it is NOT solid.

The nails are not what they appear, but are only pieces about one
half inch in length, and do not even go through the board.  The
piece is fastened on the other side with a couple of bolts that
hold it very firmly in place.  There is a corresponding opening in
the mopboard in the next room, although no attempt is made to so
carefully conceal it, as no one is ever admitted to it.  Through
this trap the "spooks" enter the cabinet by crawling and wiggling.
It is not a very desirable trap, for the mopboard is scarcely ever
wide enough to permit of a trap that the spook could get through in
a hurry; besides, they must assume their costumes after they get
into the cabinet or tear them to pieces.  You can see how this
would make it very inconvenient.

If the room is wainscoted the spook will have all the sea room
necessary in his trap, for it will extend from just below the
molding on the top of the wainscoting to the floor behind the strip
of quarter-round. . . .

It is next to an impossibility to detect these traps by examining
in the cabinet.  They were constructed to avoid discovery, and no
pains spared to make them so absolutely perfect that not one chance
in a million is taken.  The proper place to seek for traps is in
the adjoining room, upstairs, or in the cellar.  One is foolish to
undertake to find a trap by thumping the walls or floor; for, if
you happen to thump one, the medium who is smart enough to make use
of a trap is also sharp enough to make provision for its being
thumped, and your sounding method goes for naught.[1]  Bear in mind
that when you are examining the cabinet, you are seeking at the
very place that is prepared most effectually to withstand your
investigations. . . .  Do not forget the MANAGER in your search.
He or she is never searched, or never has been up to date, which
has been the cause of many a failure to find the "properties" of
the medium when the seance was given in a room and cabinet
furnished by a stranger and skeptic.  Do not be deceived into a
belief that all of the sitters are strangers to the medium.  There
may be from one to five persons present who pay their money the
same as yourself, and who may appear to be the most skeptical of
anyone in the room.  They will generally be the recipients of some
very elegant "tests," and weep copiously great grief-laden tears
when they recognize the beloved features of some relative.


[1] It must be remembered that it is occasionally possible for the
medium to do away with traps altogether, either by having a con-
federate in the audience who produces all the phenomena--the medium
sitting bound meanwhile--or by some such simple device as the
following: Suppose the seance room is closed at one end by a pair
of folding-doors; these doors are locked, the key kept by a member
of the audience, while the keyhole is sealed, and strips of gummed
paper are also stretched across the crack between the doors,
sealing them firmly together.  Confederates enter the room, in this
case, by merely pushing BOTH doors to one side, they being so
constructed that this is possible.  A small space is now left
around the end of ONE door, through which the medium's confederate
creeps!


They are the most careful of investigators, and, when the medium's
trap is located in the door-jamb, will pound the walls, and insist
on the carpet being taken up, when they will get upon their hands
and knees and make a most searching examination of the floor.  They
are the closest and most critical of investigators, but they are
very careful to examine everywhere EXCEPT WHERE THE DEFECT IS
LOCATED.  Because one or two men seem to be making such a critical
investigation, do not allow that fact to prevent you making one on
your own responsibility.  Wait until they have finished and then
examine not only where they did, but more particularly where they
did NOT.  Their examination is only for the purpose of misleading
others.  Their "tests" are received in a way to cause those about
them to think they admit them very unwillingly, or because they
were so undeniable that they could do nothing else.

A great many will probably deny that confederates are ever
employed.  They are not, by mediums who are not smooth enough to
produce that which appears so wonderful as to make a good business
for them.  The writer would advise those mediums who give such rank
seances to employ a few floor workers (they are easily obtained),
and see what a difference it would make in the amount of business
they will do.  Get good ones, those who know human nature, and know
when they have said all that is necessary.  Most of them are
inclined to say too much, thus causing the ordinary man to suspect
that they are confederates.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Lock and Key Library/Real Life

Project Gutenberg's The History of Antiquity, Vol. I (of VI), by Max Duncker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The History of Antiquity, Vol. I (of VI)

Author: Max Duncker

Translator: Evelyn Abbott

Release Date: January 26, 2012 [EBook #38677]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY ***




Produced by Adrian Mastronardi and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








  THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY.



  THE
  HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY.

  FROM THE GERMAN
  OF
  PROFESSOR MAX DUNCKER,


  BY
  EVELYN ABBOTT, M.A.,
  _FELLOW AND TUTOR OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, OXFORD._


  VOL. I.


  LONDON:
  RICHARD BENTLEY & SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
  Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen.
  1877.




PREFACE

TO THE ENGLISH EDITION.


Fifty years ago, the opinion was held by some that we could watch, in
the tradition of the most ancient realms of the East, the first awkward
steps in the childhood of the human race, while others believed that it
was possible to discover there the remnants of an original wisdom,
received by mankind at the beginning of their course immediately from
the hand of heaven. The monuments of the East, subsequently discovered
and investigated by the combined labour of English, German, and French
scholars, have added an unexpected abundance of fresh information to the
Hebrew Scriptures and the narratives of the Greeks, which, till then,
were almost our only resource. No one can any longer be ignorant that
Hither Asia at a very remote period was in possession of a rich and
many-sided civilisation. The earliest stages of that civilisation in the
valley of the Nile, of the Euphrates and the Tigris, on the coasts and
in the interior of Syria are, it is true, entirely hidden from our
knowledge; even the far more recent culture of the Aryan tribes we can
only trace with the help of the Veda and the Avesta back to the point at
which they were already acquainted with agriculture, and possessed
considerable artistic skill.

Our object in regard to the ancient East is not to retrace the beginning
of human civilization, but rather to understand and establish the value
and extent of those early phases of civilisation to which the entire
development of the human race goes back. The way to this aim is clearly
sketched out for us. A minute comparison of tradition with the results
of the successful advance of Oriental studies, a conscientious
examination of the one by the other, opens out to us the prospect of
discerning more precisely the nature of those ancient constitutions and
modes of life.

To this purpose I have undertaken to contribute by a descriptive
treatment of the subject. Such an attempt appeared to me indicated by
the consideration that the fragments of our knowledge--and more than
fragments we do not at present possess, and never shall possess, even
though we assume that the number of monuments be considerably
increased--if conscientiously brought together, would produce the most
effective impression by exhibiting the connection of all the various
sides of those ancient civilisations--and if to this collection were
added the conclusions that can be drawn from it and from the monuments
about the political life, the religion, the manners and laws, the art
and trade of those nations.

How to offer in a general survey the sum total of these fragments of the
ancient East is a problem attended with difficulties which I have felt
at every step in my work. There are not many corner-stones immovably
fixed; the outlines are often to be drawn with a wavering pen; the
unavoidable explanations of the gaps to be filled up admit of a variety
of opinions. Hence it is often--only too often--necessary to interrupt
the narrative by comments, in order to support the view taken by the
author, or refute other views, or arrive at the conclusion that there is
no sufficient evidence for a final decision. The best mode of remedying
these disagreeable interruptions was first to state the tradition, which
is generally closely connected with the peculiar nature of the people
whose fortunes it narrates, and if not actually true, is nevertheless
characteristic of the manners and views of the nation, and then to
examine this tradition in and by itself, and in conjunction with the
monuments; to state the opposite interpretations; and, finally, to give
the results thus obtained. In this way narrative and investigation are
combined in such a manner that the reader is enabled to pursue the
inquiry. The data and the critical examination of them, and lastly the
results obtained, are put before him for his own decision.

The objections, made of late to the results of Assyrian researches,
touch certain points only, in which over-hasty conclusions have
prematurely declared the enigma to be solved. Whatever doubts may still
remain, I have felt the more confidence in following the main results,
because wherever Asshur and Israel come into contact the Hebrew
Scriptures agree with the records of the kings of Asshur. Who could
understand the meaning of the verses of Nahum (iii. 8-10), of the fate
of "No-Ammon, to whose aid came Ethiopians, Arabians, and Libyans," till
G. Smith discovered the document of Assurbanipal relating to the capture
of Thebes? Who could explain the words of Ezekiel about the grave of
Elam (xxxii. 27) till the tiles of Babylonia and Assyria told us of the
ancient supremacy and power of this kingdom, and of its battles with the
Assyrians, and subjugation by their arms? If, in chronology, I have
given the preference to the tablets of the Assyrian Archons over the
Books of Kings, I have done so, not because I hold the former to be
infallible, but because the chronological dates in the Books of Kings
prove, by more than one contradiction, that they have not come down to
us intact.

My narrative embraces those independent civilisations of the ancient
East which came to exercise a mutual influence on each other. First we
follow the realm on the Nile and the kingdoms of Hither Asia as far as
the point where the nations of Iran began to influence their destinies.
Then I attempt to set forth the peculiar development of the Aryan tribes
in the valleys of the Indus and the Ganges, down to the times of
Tshandragupta and Asoka. Then follows the history of the Bactrians, the
Medes, and the Persians, until the period when the nations of the
table-land of Iran were united by Cyrus and Darius with the countries
of Western Asia, when Aryan life and Aryan civilisation gained the
supremacy over the whole region from Ceylon to the Nile and the
Hellespont. The forms of life at which the great empires of Asia had
arrived are finally brought face to face with the more youthful
civilisation attained by the Hellenes in their mountain cantons. This
new development we follow down to the first great shock when East and
West met in conflict, and the Achæmenids sought to crush the Hellenes
under the weight of Asia. With the failure of this attempt my history of
the ancient world concludes.

                                                          MAX DUNCKER.

BERLIN, _March_, 1877.




CONTENTS.


BOOK I.

_EGYPT._

  CHAPTER I.                                                      PAGE
  THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE                                            1

  CHAPTER II.
  THE ANTIQUITY OF THE CIVILISATION IN THE VALLEY OF THE NILE       15

  CHAPTER III.
  THE RELIGION OF THE EGYPTIANS                                     42

  CHAPTER IV.
  THE KINGDOM OF MEMPHIS                                            84

  CHAPTER V.
  THE HYKSOS  AND THE RESTORATION OF THE EGYPTIAN KINGDOM          122

  CHAPTER VI.
  THE HOUSE OF RAMSES                                              142

  CHAPTER VII.
  THE MONUMENTS OF THE HOUSE OF RAMSES                             167

  CHAPTER VIII.
  LIFE AND MANNERS OF THE EGYPTIANS                                183


BOOK II.

_THE SEMITIC NATIONS._

  CHAPTER I.
  THE ANCIENT KINGDOM OF BABYLON                                   233

  CHAPTER II.
  THE RELIGION AND SCIENCE OF THE CHALDÆANS                        264

  CHAPTER III.
  THE ART AND TRADE OF BABYLONIA                                   287

  CHAPTER IV.
  THE ARABS                                                        307

  CHAPTER V.
  THE CANAANITES                                                   337

  CHAPTER VI.
  THE RELIGIOUS RITES OF THE CANAANITES                            351

  CHAPTER VII.
  THE ORIGIN AND DESCENT OF THE HEBREWS                            383

  CHAPTER VIII.
  THE HEBREWS IN EGYPT                                             420

  CHAPTER IX.
  THE LIBERATION OF THE HEBREWS                                    441

  CHAPTER X.
  THE HEBREWS IN THE DESERT                                        467

  CHAPTER XI.
  THE HEBREW INVASION OF CANAAN                                    490

  CHAPTER XII.
  THE NATIONS OF ASIA MINOR                                        510




ERRATA.


  Page 14, line 3 from bottom, _for_ "chalk rock" _read_ "lime-stone."
   "   51,  "   3       "      _for_ "sun-globe" _read_ "sun-mountain."
   "   81,  "   2       "      _for_ "horologe" _read_ "sun-mountain."
   "  140,  "  10       "      _for_ "_savans_" _read_ "_savants_."




BOOK I.

EGYPT.




EGYPT.




CHAPTER I.

THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE.


History knows nothing of her infancy. The beginning of the development
of the human race lies beyond the sphere of memory, and so also do the
first steps in that development. The early stages of culture--whether in
nations or individuals--are unconscious, and unobservant of self; they
are therefore without the conditions which make remembrance possible.
The original forms of social life in the family and in the tribe, the
movement of wandering hunters and shepherds, the earliest steps in
agriculture, could leave behind them neither monuments nor records. It
is true no gifted or favoured nation, which has raised itself above
these beginnings to civic life and independent culture, has neglected to
cast a backward glance upon the history of its past. Everywhere the
attempt has been made to present the past from the later point of
culture. Whether the memory reaches but a little way, or goes back far
into the past, it is always enriched by ideas taken from religious
conceptions, or national pride, from reflection or theory. Such
reconstructions are significant of the nature and character of the
people for whom they replace the history of their youth, but they have
no claim to represent the actual course of their development. The case
is different when the growing culture of a people is observed by nations
already at a higher grade of civilisation. The Romans were in a position
to leave behind a picture of the youthful German tribes; the Byzantines
could inform us of the movements of the Slaves; modern Europe could
observe the tribes of America, the nomadic shepherds of Asia, and the
islanders of the South Sea from a higher and riper point of development.

The oldest kingdoms of which tradition and monuments preserve any
information passed unobserved through the earliest stages of their
culture. Tradition and the earliest monuments present them already in
the possession of a many-sided and highly-developed civilisation. In
what way these nations, the oldest representatives of the culture of
mankind, arrived at their possession, we can only deduce from such
evidence as is before us anterior to tradition and independent of
it--from the nature of the regions where these civilisations sprung up,
from the physical character and constitution of the nations which
developed them, from their languages and their religious ideas.

The history of antiquity is the description of the forms of culture
first attained by the human race. If it is impossible to discover the
origin of these forms historically, and the attempt is made to indicate
their preliminary stages, so far as the recorded elements allow
connected conclusions, it becomes the chief object of such a history to
recover from the fragments of monuments and tradition the culture of the
ancient East, and of the Hellenes so closely connected with the East:
to reconstruct from isolated relics and myths the image of that rich and
ample life which filled the East in religion and state, in art and
industry, in research and commerce, in political struggles and intense
religious devotion, long before the time when Solon gave laws to the
Athenians, and the army of Cyrus trod the shore of the Ægean Sea.

The oldest civilisation, the oldest state grew up on that quarter of the
globe which seems least favourable to the development of mankind. On
either side of the equator, Africa stretches out in huge land-locked
masses. A vast table-land occupies the whole south of the continent, and
in the north sinks down to a plain more impassable even than the broad
seas which wash the coasts of Africa on the west, south, and east. This
plain--the bed of a dry sea--lies in the burning sun without vegetation.
Only where springs water the thirsty soil do fruitful islands rise out
of the moving sand, the lonely waste of ravines, the craggy ridges, and
bald platforms of rock.

As the sea nowhere indents the coasts of Africa with deep bays, the
rivers cannot excavate broad and fruitful valleys, and provide means of
access to the interior. The high table-land is surrounded by a steep
rampart of mountains, which descend in terraces to the coast, and here,
almost without exception, leave narrow strips of low and marshy land.
Through the barrier drawn around them by this rampart the rivers must
force their path in a violent course, in waterfalls and rapids, in order
to fall into the sea after a short, and proportionately more sluggish
course through the narrow strip on the shore.

The table-land, its rampart of mountains, and the long lines of coast,
are, with the exception of the southern apex and the Alpine territory
of Abyssinia in the east, the dwelling-places of the black race--the
negro. However great the number of negro nations and tribes, however
much they differ in physical form and in dialect--living as they do
beneath a vertical sun, in regions difficult of access--they have never
risen beyond the infancy of human civilisation--a rude worship of gods.
Wherever they have not been powerfully affected by the introduction of
foreign elements, generation has followed generation without remembrance
or essential alteration.

The north coast of Africa is of a different character to the rest of the
continent. While the western coast looks to the broad Atlantic Ocean,
and the waves which break on the southern apex lead to the ice of the
pole, the north coast is separated from the neighbouring shores by a
basin of moderate extent. It is a mountainous district which fills up
the space between the Sahara and the Mediterranean. Towards the west the
peaks of Atlas reach, even in this climate, to the region of eternal
snow; on the east, towards the mouths of the Nile, the hills gradually
sink down, and the plain of Barca rises little more than 1,000 feet
above the sea level. Numerous chains of hills, at one time pressing
close upon the sea, at another leaving more extensive plains upon the
coast, cover the northern edge, which along the deep valleys of the
mountain streams exhibits that vigorous and luxuriant vegetation so
characteristic of Africa when not checked by want of water, although
even these fruitful valleys are again in their turn broken by droughty,
and therefore bare, table-lands and depressions.

On this northern coast, toward the Mediterranean, opens the valley
which, in extent of fruitful territory, is the largest in the whole
continent. It occupies the north-east corner of Africa, which is only
separated from Arabia by a narrow strip of sea, and carries its gleaming
waters through the wide space from the subsidence of the table-land down
to the coast, where for almost its whole remaining breadth the continent
is filled up with the desert of Sahara.

From the north-east spur of the table-land, out of vast lakes (Ukerewe),
fed from the glaciers and snows of huge mountains lying under the
equator, and passing through the lower lake Mwutan, flows the western
arm of the Nile, the White Nile, Bahr-el-Abiad. After bursting through
the terraces of the mountain, it reaches, at the foot, a woody morass,
filled with thickets of tamarisks and sycamores, of bamboo and reeds and
tall creepers, inhabited by the elephant and rhinoceros, the
hippopotamus and the crocodile, the zebra and hyena, by antelopes and
snakes. Then the stream passes into broad savannas, covered here and
there with tropic forests, and while flowing through a mountainous
district of moderate elevation, it unites with the eastern arm, the Blue
Nile, Bahr-el-Azrak, which, rising further to the east out of the
Abyssinian plateau, brings down a far smaller bulk of water from the
Alpine glades of the snowy mountain Samen. Combined into one stream,
these waters flow through a broad expanse of rock and desert, covered
with conical stones of volcanic origin. The lines of hills running
parallel to the terraces of the mountain rampart lie athwart the river;
and through this barrier it breaks in numerous cataracts. Only in the
depressions between them can the soil, refreshed with water, support
vegetation. Finally, at Syene the Nile passes through the last cataract.
Henceforward the structure of the mountains is changed. A fissure in
the rock about 750 miles long opens on the Mediterranean; and through
this the mighty river--at the last cataract it is 3,000 feet in
breadth--can flow onward in undisturbed peace to the ocean.

Out of this fissure the Nile has created a narrow strip of fruitful
soil--the valley is not more than three or four hours in breadth on an
average--which is secured by the heights on the west from the moving
sand and the storms of the great desert, and is separated by the
mountain on the east from the rocky crags, the desolate flats, and sandy
dunes which fill up the space between the valley of the river and the
Red Sea. To this valley the mighty river not only gives a refreshing
coolness and moisture by the mass of its waters, it fertilises and
manures it from year to year by its overflow. At the summer solstice,
when the snow on the peaks of the lofty mountains, in which the two arms
of the Nile take their rise, is melting, and the tropical rains fall
upon its upper course, the waters of the river slowly and gradually
rise. Towards the end of July it passes over the banks and overflows the
whole valley as far as the enclosing lines of hills, so that towards the
end of September it stands more than twenty feet above the lowest water
level. Falling as gradually as it rose after more than four months it
sinks back to the ordinary level. Wherever the overflowing waters have
covered the land, there is left behind a fertilising mud or slime. This
is the soil which the two rivers before uniting have washed from the
upper hills. Carried down by the stream, it is deposited by the gentle
flow of the waters on the surface of the valley. The refreshment of the
earth by the inundation, the fertilisation by this slime, and the
cooling of the air by the immense body of water, are the essential
advantages which Egypt owes to her river, and hence, even as early as
Herodotus, Egypt seemed to be the gift of the Nile. The watering of the
soil and the cooling of the air just in the very hottest months of the
year, are the more invaluable because the blue and gleaming sky of the
upper valley is never darkened by rain clouds, while the heat is severe,
and the storms from the south-west occasionally carry the sand and the
dust over the Libyan hills into the Nile. In the Delta, the region along
the lowest course of the Nile, showers occasionally rise from the
neighbouring sea; and through eight months of the year the whole valley
opening on the Mediterranean is fanned by refreshing winds from the
north, which also facilitate navigation against the stream.

This river-valley, the like of which in nature and formation is not to
be found in the whole globe, offered in its seclusion a peculiarly
favoured spot. It was a small green oasis of luxuriant fertility and
grateful coolness in the midst of boundless deserts. The dwellers in a
land whose soil was every year newly manured by nature, which brought
forth abundantly almost without labour, must very soon have abandoned a
pastoral life for agriculture, and in consequence have acquired fixed
abodes and settled possessions. But the yearly inundation compelled them
also at an early period to protect their flocks from the water, to
secure their habitations, to observe the periods of the rising and
falling of the stream. The long duration of the overflow made it
necessary to provide for the support of man and beast. They had to learn
how to carry on their dealings with each other upon the water, when the
whole valley was still filled with the river, and to mark out firmly the
limits of their plots, so that they might again take possession of them
after the inundation. In Nubia the cataracts stopped the navigation of
the river, and the lines of rock and strips of desert made intercourse
difficult, and confined the life of the tribes within the limits of the
native valley to their separate possessions. In Egypt, within the two
lines of hills, land and river created no hindrance. A region so
concentrated could not but carry the tribes beyond the limits of
separate existence; the very land forced them to live a life more in
common. There was only a slight natural distinction between the more
secluded upper valley and the lower opening in the Delta about the
mouths of the Nile; and this could merely have a stimulating effect upon
the development of culture, without interfering in any way with its
unity. Nevertheless the community of life in the valley of the Nile was
not caused solely by the nature of the land. The tribes of the deserts
around this long and narrow oasis must have had all the more lively a
sense of the charm of the favoured valley owing to the difficulty with
which they procured their own subsistence. Against these plundering
neighbours, and their attempts to force themselves into the valley of
blessing and abundance, the inhabitants of Egypt had to combine their
forces. They needed a strong centralized command, a warlike monarchy, to
which here, earlier than elsewhere, the patriarchal government of the
tribes would therefore give way.

Egypt kept her inhabitants secluded within hard and fast limits; beyond
the hills began the desert. With the increasing number of inhabitants
the attempt must have been made to set low-lying marshy districts free
from the excess of water, and to make fruitful the higher parts of the
valley beyond the reach of the inundations by bringing the water upon
them. Experience quickly taught that the plot produced the most abundant
fruits on which the inundation had continued longest, and consequently
had time to deposit the thickest layer of mud. Hence the attempt was
made to keep the water longer on the soil by means of dykes. These
objects, in regard to which the interests of the several districts
differed, and which required the combination of large masses of
operatives to carry them out, must have made the need of a supreme
decisive and executive power felt earlier in Egypt than in other lands.

The inhabitants of Egypt found themselves surrounded by a solemn
landscape, before fixed and unchanging forms and outlines, in the midst
of natural phenomena, recurring with invariable regularity and always in
the same succession. Such surroundings and impressions must have stamped
on the young life of a ripening nation a settled, stern, and unvarying
character. When the original unity and society of life, which comprises
all members of the family and in the tribe, has been broken
through--when at the beginning of their settled life some have turned
their attention to agriculture and cattle, others to hunting and war,
others again to the fulfilment of religious duties--the sons are wont to
carry on the vocation of the fathers. This is the rule often in far more
advanced periods; and simpler conditions of life compel the son to carry
on the life of the father, in whose occupation he has grown up. In such
times there is no mode of teaching and instruction but through the
family. In this way the tribes and the nation part into separate
circles, which carry on as an inheritance the mode of life derived from
their forefathers. These divisions of occupation, of vocation, and mode
of life could be carried out earlier and with greater sharpness in
Egypt than in other lands.

As life becomes more settled and developed, there are always found
families with an especial liking for war. They are enriched by the spoil
which is the fruit of their bravery, and protect the agricultural and
pastoral part of their tribe from the attacks of plunderers. Every
nation gives willing honour to the brave warriors among them, and gladly
recognises the superiority of a mode of life which puts life to the risk
over other occupations. And when, from the early simple stage, in which
every head of a family approaches the gods with his offerings in trust
and confidence, religion has developed into a body of usages and customs
which must be performed and followed out if any share is to be obtained
in the grace of the gods, the exact knowledge of these can only be
handed down from father to son. And if the mass of the population gives
honour to the warriors, how much more readily will it bow down before
those who, by their prayers, libations, and offerings, can bring them
the fruits of the field and the blessing of the gods--protection in this
world and salvation in the next! Moreover, if the families of warriors
and priests, filled with the conviction of their own higher worth,
disdain the occupations of the rest of the people; if they are convinced
that they are of a better kind than the rest, that only from the noble
and good can the noble and good arise--that better blood gives better
feelings, and better birth better men--then in this feeling, so natural
to a primitive era, they allow their occupation to be shared only by
those who belong to their race; they take wives from their own class
only, not from others; they give their daughters in marriage to their
own people only. Thus the various modes of life and orders which
naturally come into existence end in castes.

The more fruitful the land of Egypt, the richer the products of the
soil, and the more frequent the necessity of repelling the plundering
inroads of the desert tribes, the more rapidly did the distinction
between the agricultural and military orders spring up. And the greater
the pride with which the inhabitants of this favoured land might and did
look down upon the miserable tribes of the desert, the more grateful
were the looks turned towards the gods, who had given them so beautiful
and productive a land in the midst of the desert, who supplied them with
water, fertilised their soil, cooled the heat of the atmosphere and gave
them life and plenty, while all around them reigned desolation and
death. To these beneficent powers the inhabitants of the valley of the
Nile could not refuse an earnest service of thanksgiving for blessings
so rich and so ceaselessly renewed; by their piety they had also to
provide that the gods would graciously preserve these blessings to them.
It is obvious that a tone and feeling like this, arising in the
population from the very nature of the land, must have been in a high
degree conducive to the rise of a priestly order in Egypt.

Egypt had excellent natural boundaries. If the forces of the land were
once united in a single hand, there could be no difficulty in repelling
the tribes of the desert. Thenceforward there would be little reason to
fear an enemy on this side of the boundary hills. No rival power could
arise in the neighbouring deserts, and should any victorious state arise
at a distance, the deserts checked the advance of their armies. It was
much more probable that the united forces of the river-valley should
subjugate the tribes of the surrounding desert. Hence the position of
their land allowed the inhabitants of the valley to develop undisturbed.
The culture once obtained could be quietly transmitted to others, and
constantly extended. This circumstance, in connection with the domestic
peace of the country under a monarchy, allowed the priesthood to extend
their lore in unbroken tradition from generation to generation, while
quietly amassing stores of knowledge; and with the increase of the
population all the hands not required for agriculture--and in Egypt this
claims but a small amount of labour--had to devote themselves to trade
and manufacture. And even these arts were likely to attain the greater
excellence in so far as the artisans and tillers of the ground were less
disturbed by war and military service. The more distinct the boundaries
of the land, the less to conquer and occupy outside them, the more
industrious, amid the growing population, must have been the culture of
the ground and the irrigation of it, the more actively must the artisans
have pursued their trade, and industry must have developed with a
greater vigour as the number of mouths requiring food increased.

So far as our knowledge reaches, the northern edge of Africa, like the
valley of the Nile as far as the marshes at the foot of the Abyssinian
hills, was inhabited by nations who in colour, language, and customs
were sharply distinguished from the negro. These nations belong to the
whites: their languages were most closely allied to the Semitic.[1] From
this, and from their physical peculiarities, the conclusion has been
drawn that these nations at some time migrated from Asia to the soil of
Africa. They formed a vast family, whose dialects still continue in the
language of the Berbers. Assisted by the favourable conditions of their
land, the tribe which settled on the Lower Nile quickly left their
kinsmen far behind. Indeed the latter hardly rose above a pastoral life.
The descendants of these old inhabitants of the valley of the Nile, in
spite of the numerous layers which the course of centuries has
subsequently laid upon the soil of the land, still form the larger part
of the population of Egypt, and the ancient language is preserved in the
dialect of the Copts.[2]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Bunsen, "Ægypten," 5, 1, 75 ff.; Ebers, "Ægypten and die Bücher
Moses," p. 43; Renan ("Histoire générale et système comparé des langues
Sémitiques") will not admit this close connection.

[2] Brugsch ("Histoire d'Egypte," pp. 5, 6) explains the name Egypt by
_ha-ka-ptah_, _i.e._ "the precinct of Ptah." As Ptah was more especially
the god of Memphis, this name would have come from Memphis. The attempt
has been repeatedly made to derive the civilisation of Egypt from
Ethiopia and Meroe. But the problem of the origin of a given
civilisation is not solved by removing it from the locality where it
exists in full bloom to another, and as a rule more unknown, district.
In the case before us this assumption is met by the peculiar difficulty,
that the culture of Egypt is influenced essentially by the nature of the
land, and therefore can hardly have had an external origin. It cannot be
removed from a highly favoured locality into a district extremely hot,
and fruitful only in detached oases, without making the explanation of
its origin much more difficult. Moreover, the lower valley of the Nile
has always ruled over the upper: even in mediæval and modern times. The
inscriptions of Sargon, king of Assyria (722-705 B.C.), mention the king
of Meroe (Miluhhi); those of Sennacherib (705-681 B.C.) tell us, "The
kings of Egypt have summoned the archers, the chariots, the horses of
the king of Miluhhi." The inscriptions of Esarhaddon (681-668 B.C.)
speak of the "King of Egypt and Miluhhi," whom they also name "King of
Egypt and Cush;" and the successor of Esarhaddon directed his first
campaign against "Tarku" (Thirhaka) "of Egypt and Miluhhi." The word
Meroe, therefore, as the name of a kingdom lying above Egypt on the
Nile, must have been in use in Syria, even in the eighth century B.C.
Hence the Greeks denote by this name an island, and also a city of the
Upper Nile. According to Herodotus (2, 29) the great city Meroe, "which
ought to be the chief city of the rest of the Ethiopians" (_i.e._ of
those of whom the Egyptians were not the immediate neighbours), was
forty days' journey and twelve days' sail (_i.e._ over 15,000 stadia)
above Syene. Later authorities, Eratosthenes, Artemidorus, Strabo,
Pliny, Ptolemy reduce the distance by nearly one-half; they regard the
distance between Meroe and Syene as nearly equal to the distance from
Syene to Alexandria, and fix the whole distance from Alexandria to Meroe
at 10,000 to 12,000 stadia. As the town and island of Meroe must be
south of the junction of the Astaboras (Atbara), (Strabo, p. 786), we
must look for the island between the Atbara and the Blue Nile, and for
the city in the ruins at the modern Begerauieh. Yet the chief town of
the kingdom of Meroe, when it takes an active part in history, is not
Begerauieh. King Thirhaka's residence lay near the modern Meraui under
Mount Barkal. The name in inscriptions is Neb, and, consequently, in
Greek and Latin Napata. Even under the Sesurtesen and Amenemha, Egypt
ruled over Nubia as far as Semne and Kumna, under Amenophis III. as far
as Soleb, and under Ramses II. as far as Mt. Barkal. The oldest ruins at
this spot belong to a temple dedicated by this king to Ammon (Lepsius,
"Reisebriefe," s. 238); next come the ruins of the buildings of
Thirhaka, which differ as little from Egyptian buildings as those which
he and his two Ethiopian predecessors erected in Egypt. Moreover, the
later ruins found at Napata, especially some twenty small pyramids, are
feeble imitations of Egyptian art. The same character of imitation is
stamped upon the monuments of Begerauieh, though here it is mingled with
foreign elements. This place, further removed from Egypt, and therefore
more secure, was beyond doubt the residence of the kings of Meroe, at
least from the time of Cambyses, and it was named after the country.
Herodotus points out that Zeus and Dionysus, _i.e._ Osiris, were
worshipped here, and that the oracle of Zeus, _i.e._ of Ammon, extended
its authority over the Ethiopians: the further accounts which Diodorus
preserves of this priesthood give a poor idea of their cultivation (3, 3
ff. Strabo, pp. 827, 828). At the time of the second Ptolemy, this
priesthood was destroyed by the King, Ergamenes, whose name (Arkamen)
Lepsius has discovered on ruins at Mt. Barkal, as well as Begerauieh,
and an independent monarchy was established. Hence we must entirely give
up the idea of deriving the supposed supremacy of the priesthood in
Egypt, a supremacy which never existed here, from the priesthood formed
at Begerauieh after the time of Thirhaka and Psammetichus (in the days
of Psammetichus, Herodotus tells us that a king of the Ethiopians
received strangers without an oracle, and gave them land, 2, 30); that
is, in the sixth century B.C., which continued to exist till 250 B.C.
Still less reason is there to suppose that the so-called Indian
supremacy of the priesthood came through Meroe into Egypt. Rather we may
feel ourselves justified in assuming that the elements of civilisation
which took root on the middle Nile passed from Egypt to that district.
In the inscriptions of Begerauieh the name Meroe occurs as Meru, and
Merua, _i.e._ "White rock"; Lepsius, _l. c._ 205-232. As the banks of
the Nile, here and also at Mt. Barkal, consist of whitish-yellow chalk
rocks, the name of the land and its southern metropolis, of which the
existence since the sixth century B.C. is demonstrated, may have been
named from this peculiarity of the land.




CHAPTER II.

THE ANTIQUITY OF THE CIVILISATION IN THE VALLEY OF THE NILE.


In the eighteenth century B.C., according to their reckoning, the
tradition of the Hebrews presents us with a complete picture of court
and civic life in the valley of the Nile, and it tells us of the
building of cities in the east of the Delta, which, according to the
same computation, must have been founded about the year 1550 B.C. The
Homeric poems contain accounts of the land of Ægyptus, of the
fair-flowing Zeus-born river of the same name, of the very beautiful
fields and cities of Egypt, of princes who fought from their chariots,
and finally of "Egyptian Thebes, where in the palaces lie the greatest
treasures; a city with a hundred gates, from each of which go forth two
hundred men with horses and chariots." They also add "that the fruitful
earth bears abundance of drugs in Egypt, some mingled for good, others
for evil, and there every one is a physician and has acquaintance with
men; they are all sprung from the god of healing."[3]

According to the account given by the Greeks the Egyptians boasted to be
the oldest of mankind, and to possess the most ancient traditions.[4]
Their priests believed that they could compute the history of Egypt by
thousands of years. When Herodotus was in Egypt about the middle of the
fifth century B.C., the priests at Thebes read to him from a book the
names of 331 kings who had reigned from Menes, the first ruler of Egypt,
and the founder of Memphis, down to Moeris inclusive; among these were
eighteen Ethiopians, and one queen; the rest were Egyptians. After
Moeris came Sesostris, Pheron, Proteus, Rhampsinitus, Cheops and
Chephren, Mycerinus, Asychis, Anysis, Sabakon, and Sethos, so that from
Menes to Sethos 341 kings had reigned over Egypt in as many generations.
Herodotus remarks that the priests assured him that they had an accurate
knowledge of what they said, for the years were always enumerated and
put down. To convince him they carried him into the great temple at
Thebes and showed him there 345 wooden colossi of the chief priests who
had presided over the temple through as many generations, in regular
succession from father to son; for every chief priest placed his statue
here during his own life-time. Before these kings and chief priests the
gods had ruled over Egypt; first the Eight Gods, then the Twelve, then
Osiris the Greek Dionysus, after him Typhon, and, last of all, Horus.
From the time of King Amasis (570-526 B.C.) to the time of Osiris 15,000
years had passed, but from the time of the Twelve Gods to Amasis 17,000
years.[5]

Herodotus does not conceal the doubts raised in his mind by the high
antiquity claimed in these accounts by the priests. He found an especial
difficulty in the fact that Dionysus Osiris, who, according to his
computation, was born 1,600 years at the most before his own time
(_i.e._ about 2050 B.C.), must have lived more than 15,000 years
earlier, according to the assertion of the Egyptians. By their account
341 kings reigned from Menes to Sethos; and on this basis Herodotus
reckoned the duration and commencement of the Egyptian kingdom. He took
33-1/3 years as the length of a generation, and thus Menes must have
begun to reign 340 generations, or 11,340 years before the accession of
Sethos. Further, Herodotus placed over 150 years between the accession
of Sethos and the death of Amasis, and thus according to his data we get
the enormous total of 11,500 years for the duration of the Egyptian
kingdom from Menes till its overthrow by the Persians. Menes therefore
must have ascended the throne before the year 12000 B.C.; the rule of
Osiris commenced 15500 B.C.; and that of the Twelve Gods 17500 B.C.

If we leave the gods out of the question, and reduce the length of a
generation, which Herodotus has put too high, to its real average of
twenty-five years, the 340 generations with those of Sethos,
Psammetichus, Necho, Psammetichus II., Apries, and Amasis, make up 8,650
years, and since the Persians took Egypt in 525 B.C., the beginning of
the reign of Menes still falls in the year 9175 B.C. This incredible
fact is not made more credible because Plato represents an Egyptian
priest asserting to Solon that the annals of Sais reached back 8,000
years; or speaks in the "Laws" of works of Egyptian art, ten thousand
years old.[6]

Four hundred years after Herodotus, Diodorus travelled to Egypt.[7] He
tells that, according to some fabulous accounts, gods and heroes first
ruled over Egypt for something less than 18,000 years. The last of
these was Horus, the son of Isis. After these came 470 native kings, of
whom the first was Menes, before the time of the Macedonian and Persian
rule, and also four Ethiopian kings and five queens. The Ethiopians did
not immediately succeed each other, but at intervals, and their united
reigns amounted to a little less than thirty-six years. "Of all these
kings the priests have sketches in their holy books, handed down through
successive generations from extreme antiquity, showing how tall each
king was, what he was like, and what he accomplished in his reign." If
we place the reign of Menes 479 generations before Cambyses, this
computation, on the reckoning of Herodotus, would place the accession of
Menes in the year 16492 B.C.; taking a shorter average length for the
generations, we may bring it to the year 12500 B.C. But Diodorus shows
from other accounts that this mode of computation is inadmissible. He
tells us that the priests of Egypt numbered about 23,000[8] years from
the reign of Helius or Hephæstus, who, according to other priests, was
the first of the gods to reign,[9] till the entrance of Alexander into
Asia (334 B.C.). If of this total we allow about 18,000 years to the
gods, the accession of Menes would have to be placed about the year 5300
B.C.[10] But as Diodorus also says that something less than 5,000 years
had elapsed since the first human king to his arrival in Egypt, Menes'
reign would fall about the year 5000 B.C. Diodorus fixes the accession
of this king even more closely when he remarks, in a third passage, that
the Egyptians assured him that, "for more than 4,700 years, kings,
mostly natives, had ruled, and the land had prospered greatly under
them."[11] With this agrees the further account given by Diodorus, that
according to some the largest pyramid was built 3,400 years before his
time. According to this Menes cannot be carried back further than 4,800
years B.C.

If Menes founded the kingdom of Egypt 4,800 years B.C., it continued for
4,275 years under native kings; and if in this period 346 kings ascended
the throne, as Herodotus says, or 479, as Diodorus, the average duration
of each reign would be in the first case more than twelve years, in the
second less than nine, which contradicts all credible history. The
lowest average of oriental reigns is fifteen years.

Still, from these accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus it is clear that
the priests of Egypt possessed lists of the kings in long series, and
that, according to their view, gods and demigods had ruled over Egypt
for thousands of years before the earliest of these kings. After Greek
princes had ascended the throne of the Pharaohs, and Egypt with its
monuments and writings was opened to the research of the Greeks,
Eratosthenes, who was the head of the library at Alexandria in the
second half of the third century B.C., studied the history of these old
kings--at "the royal request," as Georgius Syncellus tells us--in the
old annals and lists of the Egyptians, and transcribed these lists in
the Hellenic language.[12] This compilation of Eratosthenes contained
the names and reigns of thirty-eight kings of Thebes. Syncellus repeats
the list, and adds: "Here ended the rule of the thirty-eight kings who
were called Theban in Egypt, whose names Eratosthenes collected out of
the sacred books of Thebes and translated into the Hellenic language.
The names of the fifty-three Theban kings who followed these have been
also preserved by Apollodorus; but we consider it superfluous to add
them, for even the list of the first is of no use."[13] Thus the
researches of the Alexandrine Greeks had brought together a list of
ninety-one kings, ninety successors of Menes, out of the writings of the
priests of Thebes. As early as the time of Eratosthenes the Egyptians
assisted the researches of the Greeks. About the middle of the third
century B.C., that is, in the time of the second and third Ptolemy, an
Egyptian named Manetho (_Ma-n-thoth_ = "loved by Thoth"), of Sebennytus,
and apparently scribe to the temple at Thebes,[14] composed in Greek a
work on the history of Egypt in three books. "Obviously possessed of
Hellenic culture"--so we find it in Josephus--"Manetho wrote the history
of his country in Greek, translating it, as he tells us, from the sacred
writings; he undertook to interpret Egyptian history from the sacred
writings."[15] This work of Manetho was lost at an early period; all
that remains is the list of the dynasties, a third part of the names of
the kings, and a few fragments; and even these remnants we possess only
in excerpts by a second or third hand. Manetho begins his history of
Egypt with the rule of the gods. First came Ptah, the creative god of
light, and the great gods, then the demigods, and Manes. After these had
ruled over Egypt for 24,857 Egyptian years, according to the excerpt of
Africanus, that is for 24,820 Julian years, the rule of human kings
begins with Menes, and these continued through thirty dynasties for
5,366 years. As Manetho closes his list of the kings of Egypt with the
last year of Nectanebos, who rebelled against Artaxerxes Ochus--_i.e._
with the year 340 B.C.--Menes must have founded the kingdom in the year
5706 B.C., or rather, if we reduce the Egyptian years of Manetho's
reckoning to Julian years, in the year 5702 B.C.[16] This statement
carries us back to a far less remote antiquity than the computation of
the date of Menes by 346 generations previous to Cambyses; on the other
hand, it goes 900 years higher than the date which we deduced from
Diodorus.

What amount of authority should be ascribed to the lists of Manetho? Did
the priests really possess sketches of kings and accounts of their
reigns reaching back more than 5,000 years? In order to believe this,
must we not allow that at such a remote time as the reign of Menes, or
soon after it, writing was known and in use in Egypt? And granting this,
must not the first beginning of culture in Egypt be carried back at
least 500 years before Menes? Moreover, the lists do not correspond with
the number of the kings given by Herodotus, or by Diodorus. Herodotus,
as we said, put 346 generations before the time of Cambyses, Diodorus
gave 479 kings before the same date. The excerpt of Africanus from
Manetho, even if we substitute the smaller numbers given in the excerpt
of Eusebius in all the dynasties, of which only the total sum of the
rulers is stated, still gives us 388 kings from Menes to Cambyses.[17]
If these discrepancies awaken the suspicion that the number and the
succession of the kings was not agreed upon even by the priests
themselves, the suspicion is increased by the fact that the lists do
not tally in the various excerpts in which they have come down to us.
What weight can be given to a list which, in the excerpt from Africanus,
allows 953 years (or 802 at the least) to the rule of the Hyksos, and in
the excerpt of Eusebius allows 103 years, and again 511 years in the
excerpt of Josephus? Still greater discrepancies appear if we compare
the list of Eratosthenes with the names and numbers handed down to us
from Manetho's work. Both lists begin with Menes; both allow him a reign
of sixty-two years; but Eratosthenes describes his thirty-eight kings as
of Theban origin or race, while in Manetho the first Theban dynasty
began to reign 2,240 years after Menes.[18] Nevertheless the names of
the first three or four rulers in Eratosthenes agree with those in
Manetho. Then the coincidence breaks off till the fifteenth, sixteenth,
and seventeenth names in Eratosthenes, to which corresponding names are
found in Manetho's list, but in the twenty-eighth, twenty-ninth, and
thirtieth places; and from this point to the end of the list of
Eratosthenes there are only two or three names to which corresponding
names are found in Manetho, and these occur at far greater intervals in
the series. The last name in Eratosthenes nearly corresponds to the name
of the king, in Manetho, under whom the invasion of the Hyksos took
place. If, therefore, we assume that the list of Eratosthenes was
intended to enumerate the kings who ruled over Egypt to this date, we
find thirty-eight kings who must have reigned through 1076 years; and,
as parallel to these, we find in Manetho fourteen dynasties with at
least 241 kings, occupying a period of 3,084 years.

Scarcely less striking are the contradictions in the monuments
themselves. In the temple of Ammon at Karnak, which was extended on a
magnificent scale by Tuthmosis III. (1591-1565 B.C.),[19] the king is
delineated twice in a colossal form on the back wall of a chamber.
Between the two pictures sit sixty-four kings in four rows one over the
other. The inscription, "A royal offering for the kings of both Egypts,"
as well as the position of Tuthmosis, shows that he is offering prayer
and sacrifice to his predecessors in the kingdom. Of these sixty-four
kings, three are the immediate predecessors of Tuthmosis, Tuthmosis I.,
II., and Amosis. Before Amosis this table puts fifty-seven kings; the
name of Menes is wanting; but in Manetho's list there are nevertheless
no fewer than 284 kings,[20] from Menes to Amosis, with whom, in the
excerpt of Africanus, the eighteenth dynasty begins. In the great temple
built by Sethos I. (1439-1388, B.C.) at Abydus in honour of Osiris, this
prince, with his son Ramses, may be seen on the wall of a passage
offering prayer and incense to his predecessors in the kingdom. There
are seventy-six shields with names, beginning with the shield of Menes.
The last is the shield of Sethos, who in this way is represented as
offering prayer to himself, among the rest. Down to Amenemha IV., the
close of the twelfth dynasty (2179-2171 B.C.), there reigned, according
to Manetho's list 104 kings, but the table of Sethos gives sixty-five
shields for the interval from Menes to Amenemha IV. From this king to
Sethos, the first prince of the nineteenth dynasty, Manetho's list gives
193 kings, excluding the shepherd kings, whereas the table of Sethos
shows only ten shields for this interval.[21] Nothing in the way of
explanation is to be obtained from the monuments of this kind belonging
to the time of Ramses II. (1388-1322 B.C.) On the wall of the portico
between the first and second court of the Ramesseum, the great temple
built by Ramses II. at Thebes, on the left bank of the Nile, there is a
picture in which the statues of thirteen predecessors in the kingdom are
carried in procession before the king. There are eleven kings up to
Amosis; before him is the figure of Mentuophis; then Menes. In the
little temple built by Ramses II. at Abydus in honour of Osiris, there
is a tablet, on which Ramses is represented offering adoration to the
manes of his predecessors. On this we can make out fifty shields, but
only about thirty are sufficiently uninjured to be legible; so far as we
can tell this table is only a repetition of the table of Sethos in the
great temple of Abydus. A third series of the kings of this period has
been discovered in the tombs at Sakkarah. In the tomb of Tunari, the
kings' scribe and architect, there is a representation of the sacrifice
of Ramses II. for the deceased kings of Upper and Lower Egypt. Here we
find fifty-seven shields; immediately before Ramses II. is Sethos,
Ramses I., and Horus, then six illegible names; and before these Amosis.
Before Amosis are forty-six shields, of which the first can perhaps be
compared with the king mentioned in the sixth place after Menes in
Manetho's list.[22]

The variations of these tables from the lists may be explained by
assuming that it depended on the particular view and peculiar object of
the kings who erected these monuments, which of their predecessors they
wished to honour, and which they wished to exclude. But even a
manuscript list of kings, which has come down to us, exhibits numerous
and very considerable variations from Manetho's lists. This list is a
papyrus, now in Turin, supposed to belong to the period 1500-1000 B.C.
It begins with the rule of the gods; then follow the names of the kings,
with the length of their reigns in years, months, and days, down to the
time of the Tuthmosis; and thus it includes the first seventeen
dynasties of Manetho's list. It has been much damaged, and therefore we
can only discover that about 240 names were given, of which, however,
about 100 are entirely gone; and of the others the lesser half at least
is hardly legible. As has been remarked, Manetho numbers at least 284
kings to the eighteenth dynasty. Moreover, the papyrus does not agree
with Manetho in the division of the dynasties; at certain places, which
do not coincide with the sections of Manetho, totals are given of the
preceding reigns. The first king after the gods is Mena (Menes), but of
the names which follow only a few agree with those in Manetho, and a few
more with those of the tables of Karnak, Abydus, and Sakkarah.[23] But
here also the same names occupy different places in the series.

If in addition to all these variations and discrepancies we add the fact
that even in the contemporary monuments and inscriptions which have come
down to us there is no lack of contradictions to Manetho's
statements--if too these monuments have not been erected or preserved in
sufficient continuity, nor are of a sufficiently ample kind, to form an
adequate check upon the papyrus of Turin, or the tables of kings or the
list of Manetho--we must give up the hope of ascertaining the antiquity
and course of Egyptian history on such data. One thing only comes out
clear and irrefragable from the tables of Karnak, Abydus, and Sakkarah,
no less than the Turin papyrus. Long before Herodotus was in Egypt, long
before Manetho wrote his Egyptian history, in the fifteenth century B.C.
Menes was considered the first king of Egypt. Even then lists of the
kings were in existence, and the priests had made a sketch of the
history of their land, in which the rule of the gods preceded the rule
of human kings.

Modern research has attempted in various ways to find the key to the
puzzle of these long and confused series of kings made by the Egyptian
priests. Assuming that the names of the kings and the length of their
reigns, and the number of reigns belonging to each dynasty, has been
handed down correctly by Manetho, but that some of these dynasties were
contemporaneous, the attempt has been made to give such a selection from
the dynasties of Manetho as would supply a continuous thread for
Egyptian history. Thus from the dynasties expressly marked as Memphitic,
or Theban, a series may be formed which shortens the calculation of
Manetho by at least 1,000 years. We might proceed further in this
direction, and reduce Manetho's list by 2,000 or 3,000 years. According
to the separate items in the excerpts preserved, Manetho's thirty
dynasties include a series of 5,366 Egyptian years (from the year 5702
to the year 340 B.C.); nevertheless, Syncellus, in a passage of his
Chronology, has observed that the whole period of history treated by
Manetho in his three books covered 3,555 years.[24] This observation
has been used to prove that Manetho himself arranged several dynasties
contemporaneously; and thus, by taking the whole total of years given by
Syncellus as a basis, the year 3892 B.C. has been fixed as the first
year of the reign of Menes. No doubt a selection may be made from the
dynasties of Manetho in such a way that the sum total of the reigns
included in it will carry us no farther back than this year.[25] But it
is clear from the accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus that the series of
kings made by the Egyptian priests were strictly successive; and this
fact is abundantly confirmed by the Turin papyrus and the excerpts
preserved from Manetho himself. The 3,555 years which Syncellus brings
forward cannot, in the face of his own excerpt, be taken as a number
really derived from Manetho, and with this number all the calculations
founded upon it fall to the ground.[26]

A second path, which has lately been struck out for the reduction of
Manetho's dynasties, is based upon the list of Eratosthenes. The
thirty-eight kings enumerated in this list are placed beside the first
fourteen dynasties of Manetho. It is assumed that only the names quoted
in Eratosthenes are the names of real monarchs, and that we must look
for similar names in the list of Manetho. By this assumption, it is
true, we are compelled to set aside several of Manetho's dynasties, and
even to throw away the greater part of the kings of the dynasties which
are allowed to count in the series.[27] But even when we have overcome
all the difficulties in the way of this system, we are still without the
means to define accurately the duration of the rule of the alien kings,
which, as has been already remarked, according to the various excerpts
from the list of Manetho, continued 953, or 511, or 103 years; nor is
there any fixed point immediately before the alien monarchy to enable us
to succeed in establishing the antiquity and commencement of the
Egyptian series of kings.

All attempts to arrive at the antiquity of the civilisation and history
of Egypt by these means are the more doubtful, because in Egypt there is
no fixed era to form a basis for calculation. The time is reckoned by
the reigns of the kings. In such a case even the most cautious inquiry
of the priests could hardly have arrived at a satisfactory chronology
for the oldest period. Though they had before them far more numerous
monuments than we have, and though the lists of the various dominant
families began to be kept at a very early period, it was no longer
possible at the time when the lists of the Turin papyrus were made out,
to discover in what order the families came, or which ruled
contemporaneously before the time of the alien kings. The mere
arrangement of our materials in the order of succession cannot fail to
give an entirely false picture of the history of Egypt, while on the
other hand the national pride of the Egyptians, and the vanity of the
priests, found a great satisfaction in exaggerating the antiquity of
their history by such enumerations, even where it was known that any
families of kings were contemporaneous. With what pride and complacency
would they exhibit this endless list of kings to the travelling
strangers from Greece!

Besides the want of a fixed era, and the insufficient knowledge of the
ancient period, and of the alien monarchy--besides the motives of
national vanity, there was another remarkable circumstance connected
with the priests of Egypt which was calculated to lead them far away
from historical truth. The Egyptians measured time by a solar year of
360 days, divided into twelve months of thirty days. It was early
observed that this year did not correspond to the sun's orbit; and
therefore five additional days were added. The decisive event of the
Egyptian year was the inundation. The Nile began to rise at the time of
the summer solstice, and was coincident with the rising of the Dog-star
(Sothis), the brightest star in the Egyptian sky. The Dog-star
proclaimed the approach of the inundation and the new fertilization of
the soil, and by proclaiming caused it. Thus to the Egyptians this star
Sothis was "the Lady of the Beginning." The rising of the star denoted
the new year; which therefore must have begun on the 20th July, the
first of Thoth in the Egyptian calendar. But since, in the Egyptian
year, a quarter of a day was wanting, in spite of the additional five
years, to make up the true astronomical year, the beginning of every
fourth year must have been a day in advance of the true year, and the
seasons, of which the Egyptians made three of four months each, the
months, and the festivals anticipated more and more the true time of the
year. This advance could not have escaped the priests; they must soon
have observed that a period of 1,461 Egyptian years must elapse in order
to allow the Egyptian year to coincide with astronomical time. For in
1,460 Egyptian years the additional quarter of a day in the astronomical
year would amount to 365 whole days--_i.e._ to an Egyptian year; and at
the end of this year the beginning of the next was again coincident with
the rising of the Dog-star, as seen from Lower Egypt, and the
commencement of the inundation. Thus in a period of 1,461 years the year
was again brought to its true beginning.[28] Since the fruitfulness and
life of the Egyptian land depended on the inundation, and the inundation
began with the rising of the Dog-star, the history of Egypt must also
have begun with a similar rising. If after 1,461 Egyptian years the
rising of the Dog-star again coincided with the beginning of the civic
year, the priests would regard this restoration of the natural order as
the completion of a great cycle of events. The Dog-star brought the
inundation, and with it the fruits and life of Egypt. It was the
awakener of life. It must therefore have brought life to the world also;
time must have begun with the rising of Sirius. Porphyrius tells us that
to the Egyptians the rising of the Dog-star was the beginning of the
world.[29] Hence the periods of the world must proceed according to a
number of periods fixed by the Dog-star. It seems that the priests
comprised the whole duration of the world in twenty-five Sothis periods,
_i.e._ in 36,525 Egyptian years. Regarded in this light, the Sothis
periods of the priests of Egypt must lead to a cyclic treatment of their
history, to which also the want of any definite era was forcing them,
while the antiquity and number of the lists of kings offered abundant
material for it. The history of Egypt must comprise a definite number of
Sothis periods. It was known that in the fourteenth century B.C. such a
period ended, and a new one commenced; the difficulty was to fill up two
or three periods anterior to this. Before the Sothis period of the
kings, the gods had ruled over Egypt, to whom, therefore, a number of
Sothis cycles, naturally more extensive than those given to the rule of
men, was allotted. Thus the priests of Thebes were able to tell
Herodotus that, from the time when the Twelve Gods ruled over Egypt,
down to the days of King Amosis, 17,000 years had passed; that from
Menes, down to Sethos, 341 kings ruled in succession over Egypt, and
that in this space of time the sun had four times risen in an unusual
way--it had twice risen where it then set, and had twice set where it
then rose; and nothing in Egypt had been changed by this, either in the
gifts of the earth or the river, in sickness or in mortality.[30] This
change of the rising and setting of the sun is nothing more than the
symbolical astrology of the priests, who must have expressed the
completion of the movable solar year by the opposite quarters of the
sky; and it means no more than that two Sothis periods had elapsed
between Menes and Sethos; but to Herodotus the statement as given
naturally appeared quite incredible.[31] What the priests told
Herodotus, Manetho, following far older authorities, had already fixed
in a systematic form before Diodorus found that the gods ruled 18,000
years, and the human kings had begun to reign 4,700 years before his
arrival in Egypt. To the gods and demigods Manetho allows twelve Sothis
periods, _i.e._ 17,520 Julian years. Then follows the history of the
men, the beginning of which Manetho places in the commencement of that
period of the Dog-star which begins with the year 5702 B.C. From this
point the series of kings runs through three complete Sothis periods
down to Menephta; in the fourth period Manetho closed the lists of his
thirty dynasties with the last native ruler in 340 B.C., the 984th year
of the fourth Sothis period of the human kings. Thus it would be
possible to make the scheme clear on which the priests of Egypt dealt
with the history of their land, and the lists of Manetho would then lay
claim to complete historical credibility for the ancient periods in
isolated items, though certainly not in their combination as a whole.

With this result before us the only course open is to seek for external
evidence, and attempt to ascertain the antiquity of the civilisation of
Egypt independently of the priests and their traditions. The first fixed
point in Egyptian chronology is given by the campaign of Pharaoh Sisak
against Judah and Jerusalem. Sisak caused a sketch of his enterprise to
be delineated on the wall of a structure erected by him in the temple at
Karnak. According to Manetho's list, Sisak (Sesonchis), the first ruler
of his twenty-second dynasty, begins his reign in the year 934 B.C.[32]
But the chronology of the Hebrews, which from the establishment of the
monarchy downwards coincides within a few insignificant variations with
the Assyrian records, proves that Sisak must have been king in the first
half of the tenth century B.C. The campaign against Judah falls in the
middle of this century. From Sisak to the expulsion of the Hyksos there
was an interval of at least 500 years, as we may maintain approximately
from the names of kings and their reigns recorded on monuments. If
therefore we accept the excerpt from Manetho's history given in Josephus
(and that excerpt was made precisely for this period, and has come down
to us in the best shape), and allow 511 years for the reign of the
Hyksos, we arrive at the year 2000 B.C. as the end of the old monarchy.
From this monarchy numerous monuments have come down to us belonging to
the Amenemha, and Sesurtesen, the twelfth dynasty of Manetho; and again
to the time preceding these princes belong the greatest monuments in
Egypt, the pyramids of Memphis, which, according to Manetho's list, are
the work of the fourth dynasty. These pyramids therefore may have been
built about the year 2500 B.C. The plan and execution of these monuments
presuppose a very long practice in the treatment and preparation of
materials; the size, permanence, and solidity of the construction were
impossible without great experience in the use of stone; and their
massive form requires an acquaintance with the principles of
architecture which can only be obtained in the course of centuries. And
independently of the advanced state of architecture exhibited by these
monuments at the first sight, their erection is a proof of a condition
of social and civic life far removed from primitive tribal communities.
So long as tribes few in number and isolated from each other possessed
the valley of the Nile, under the rule of their tribal chiefs, such
structures were impossible. They presuppose a settled population,
accustomed to work, and skilled in it. And more than this. The whole
population could not any longer be occupied in agricultural work; there
must have been a considerable amount of superfluous labour, living upon
the productions obtained from the earth by others. Such structures
required the united force of many thousands, the continued efforts of
long years. And as the use of complex machinery for moving and raising
the heavy materials was unknown to the Egyptians, and remained unknown,
as we see from the monuments, a still greater force of men and beasts of
draught were necessary to move such huge squares and blocks by means of
a simple lever and rollers. Finally, the combination and continued
employment of such forces presupposes that society has been subordinated
to a superior direction and power, which could apply those forces as it
chose; in a word, it presupposes an economical, political, and technical
civilisation, removed by at least 500 years from pastoral life and
patriarchal rule. If therefore we may assume that the great pyramids
were erected about the year 2500 B.C., the beginning of higher
civilisation in the valley of the Nile must not be placed later than the
year 3000 B.C.

This assumption is confirmed by the fact that the oldest monuments of
Egypt--and they are also the oldest in the world--exhibit the Egyptians
in possession of the art of writing. All writing proceeds from pictures.
The writing of the Egyptians and Babylonians, like that of the Chinese,
Mexicans, and the tribes of North America, was in the first instance no
more than speaking pictures. The Egyptians engraved on the stone of
their rocks pictures of the objects and events of which they wished to
preserve the remembrance. As this use of pictures to assist the memory
became more common and more regular, from external no less than internal
reasons, it quickly acquired certain abbreviations and combinations. The
frequent repetition of a picture led to its abbreviation. The picture of
a house dwindled into a square; water is not so much sketched as
indicated by waved lines; instead of a forest we have the outline of a
tree--in Egypt we find the sycamore, the most common tree in the
country. Thus from actual imitative pictures we arrive at indicatory
pictures. But how could the various kinds of fluid, for instance, be
represented in these indicatory pictures? The three waved lines
indicating water were retained, but beside them was sketched a wine-jar
or water-pot, and thus the desired end was attained. By adding the
picture of a god to the square, a temple was distinguished from a house.
By such means the objects of the visible world could be reproduced in
pictures more or less abbreviated. Even the actions and conditions of
men which do not come immediately under the eye could be represented in
this abbreviated metaphorical manner. Giving could be represented by an
outstretched arm with a loaf; opening, by a door; going, by a road
planted with trees; travelling, by a walking bird; battle, by an arm
equipped with shield and lance; binding and fastening, by a coiled rope;
destruction, by a prostrate man. It was more difficult to represent
conditions which do not show themselves to the eye, as, for instance,
hunger and thirst. To express thirst the Egyptians chose the symbol of
water and a calf running to it; hunger they represented by a hand
conveyed to the mouth, and this was also the symbol of eating. But the
most difficult task for this picture-writing was the description of
objects transcending sense, and abstract ideas. For the gods, it is
true, popular notions and the fancy of the priests had supplied fixed
forms which only required to be abbreviated for the picture-writing. The
picture of the sky-goddess served as a symbol for the sky. The Egyptians
regarded the sky as arched over the earth; the feet of the goddess
rested on one extremity, and her hands on the other. Instead of the
complete figure of the goddess in this arched attitude, they drew a line
of a similar kind, and this was the abbreviated picture of the sky. If
the sun or a star was combined with this line, the picture represented
the day and the night. But the abstract ideas of law and justice, truth,
protection, good, evil, life, &c., could only be represented in this
picture-writing by sensuous images. In Egypt power was represented by a
brandished whip, or poleaxe; justice, by the cubit, or symbol of equal
measurement; good, by the symbol of sound, in order perhaps to indicate
harmony; evil, by the picture of an unclean fish; truth, by an ostrich
feather--the feathers of this bird are said to remain unchanged;
protection, by a soaring vulture, &c., &c.

Though the possession of such indicatory or symbolic pictures enabled
men to describe a series of objects and conditions, and even certain
classes of conceptions--this picture-writing was nevertheless far
removed from the expression of a definite and intelligible speech. It
was a great step in the Egyptian writing when to their simple
metaphorical and symbolical pictures phonetic pictures were added. From
the actual picture by means of abbreviation, by indicatory signs and
symbols, they had arrived at picture-signs, and had succeeded in
expressing a certain feeling by means of figures; but now the indication
of the sound was added to the representation of the sense. The
picture-writing could only go to these picture-signs in order to borrow
the symbols for sound. Hence the sound A was denoted by a symbol which
signified an object of which the name began with A; for this in Egypt
the symbol of an eagle (_achem_), or of a reed (_ak_), might be, and was
selected. Thus in order to express words which could not be made plain
by picture-signs and images of sense, the plan was adopted of adding to
the picture-signs already in use for such words, one or more phonetic
symbols, a complete or incomplete phonetic supplement. Hence arose a
class of mixed pictures, made up of the picture of the object, with the
addition of the sounds of the words of which the picture was intended to
express the meaning. To make the meaning yet more clear, it was found
necessary to add key-signs, indicating the class and nature of the word
in question. Thus with the pictorial and phonetic signs for day and hour
was combined the sign of the sun, and to the names of countries and
rivers the sign for land and water. Moreover these key-signs showed
whether the word symbolised by a sound or a picture denoted an animal, a
plant, a kind of stone, or belonged to a particular class of conditions
and actions. Yet in this combination of real and phonetic pictures, it
always remained uncertain whether a picture or symbol was to be taken
for its real meaning, or was to be regarded as a phonetic symbol.

This, then, is the difficult writing of the Egyptians; these are the
hieroglyphics as presented even on those great monuments. Even here we
find this method of writing applied in the same forms, and with the same
mixture of pictorial and phonetic signs, which it retained in Egypt,
with slight modifications (see below). Without doubt, the development of
this complicated system was the work of centuries. In the infancy of
history, special insight and capability is obtained and handed down only
within the limits of certain circles. There could be no regular
application and development of this system of writing before the
formation of a priestly order. And again, the separation of such an
order from the rest of the people could only take place gradually; it
must go through a number of stages to raise it above the primitive
conditions of life. When this point of culture was reached, a
considerable space of time was still needed in order to bring the
picture-writing, even within the priestly class, to the form in which we
see it on the pyramids. In those nations whose progress we can follow
with greater accuracy, centuries must pass before the indefinite and
floating notions entertained of the gods are fixed in rigid forms. Yet
in Egypt this change had already taken place before the date of the
oldest hieroglyphics: for even in these we find typical forms in use for
the gods, with sharply drawn and abbreviated outlines. In the
picture-writing itself there is a wide interval between the delineation
of an incident, or object, and the representation of a definite
feeling; and a yet wider interval before the expression of ideas, of
definite speech, is attained. An advanced stage of reflection and
abstraction is required in order to step from the picture of an
occurrence to picture-signs and images of sense, and again from these to
phonetic symbols. The symbols for an incident, and for an idea and a
sound, are separated by a wide gulf. Independently of these internal
requirements for the advance of picture-writing, the external form in
which the oldest hieroglyphics are represented, their even, harmonious,
clearly-cut and unalterable forms, are evidence not only of an
industrious and careful application of these signs, but also of a
tolerably long use. The oldest hieroglyphics of the date of the great
pyramids are for the most part embossed; but even the engraved work of a
date very little more recent is not surpassed by later times in artistic
excellence, in sharpness and neatness of execution.

The study of the calendar of Egypt, no less than the use of writing upon
the great monuments, carries us back to an early date for the beginning
of Egyptian civilization. We saw that the priests, by adding five days
to the old year of 360 days, had come tolerably near to the natural
year, and had fixed the beginning of their year by the rising of Sirius.
Monuments of the age of the Amenemha and Sesurtesen show that even then
the rising of Sirius had been observed and noted. Nevertheless, the
beginning of their short civic year tended to anticipate the natural
year; and thus the Egyptian year was always in advance of the solar. But
if it was observed and noted down by the Egyptians, that in the year of
their reckoning, corresponding to the Julian year 1322 B.C., the
beginning of the year had again fallen on the right day, that is, on
the rising of Sirius, so that the first day of Thoth in the movable year
coincided with the first day of Thoth in the solar year, which was the
20th of July, it follows that the fixing of the beginning of the year on
July 20, and of the length of the year at 365 days, had taken place
1,460 years (p. 30) before the date 1322 B.C., _i.e._ in the year 2782
B.C. This conclusion is supported by another consideration. Our
astronomers have calculated that it was only in the two or three
centuries preceding and following the year 3285 B.C. that the rising of
Sirius so exactly coincided with the summer solstice and the rise of the
Nile; and therefore in this epoch only could the observation have been
made that Sirius brought the inundation. Hence in this period only could
the beginning of the year have been fixed at the rising of Sirius. But
if the Egyptians could set aside an old calendar and introduce a new
arrangement requiring attention and long-continued observations,
somewhere about the year 2800 B.C., it is clear that the beginnings of
higher culture in Egypt cannot be later than 3000 B.C.[33]

Valuable as this result is, we are nevertheless carried back to
hypotheses and combinations in order to fix the various epochs, and more
especially before the reign of the Hyksos. And as an arrangement of
history is impossible without chronology, divisions must be assumed here
and there where it is impossible to establish them satisfactorily. The
arrangement of Egyptian chronology proposed by Lepsius has for the first
time introduced a well-considered system into the whole. Hence, in spite
of the objections already brought forward against the basis of this
arrangement, and the proved uncertainties and contradictions of
tradition and the monuments, which the progress of inquiry into the
older periods may indeed lessen but cannot remove, I follow the data
given by Lepsius for the epochs of Egyptian history, and the duration of
the reigns which come under our notice.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] "Il." 9, 381; "Od." 4, 230 ff. 477, 581. 14, 257, 264 ff. 17, 426.

[4] Herod. 2, 2; Diod. 1, 10, 50; Plat. Tim. p. 23.

[5] Herod. 2, 100, 142, 143.

[6] Plato, "Tim." p. 23; "De Leg." p. 657.

[7] Diodorus, 1, 44, 45, Olympiad 180, _i.e._ between 60 and 56 B.C.

[8] Or, according to another version, more than 10,000 years from Osiris
to Alexander. More than 10,000 years had passed, according to the
Egyptians, since the creation of the first man.--Diod. 1, 23, 24.

[9] Diod. 1, 13, 14.

[10] Ibid. 1, 69.

[11] Diod. 1, 63.

[12] Syncell. p. 91, ed. Goar.

[13] Syncell. p. 12.

[14] Boeckh, "Manetho," p. 395.

[15] "C. Apion." c. 14, 26.

[16] Boeckh, "Manetho," p. 769 ff.

[17] Reinisch reckons 389 kings from Menes to Cambyses, "Zeitschrift d.
d. M. Ges." 15,251; Brugsch's table gives 334 royal shields from Menes
to Cambyses.

[18] According to Boeckh's "Kanon des Africanus."

[19] This, like the following dates, is from Lepsius, see below.

[20] Not including the thirty-eight shepherd kings; if these are added
the number reaches 322.

[21] Dümichen and Lepsius, "Zeitschrift für Aegyptische Sprache," 1864,
p. 81 ff. Deveria and Mariette, "Revue Archéolog." 1865, p. 50 ff; 1866
(13), p. 73 ff.

[22] Mariette in "Revue Archéolog.," 1864 (10), p. 170.

[23] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp. 20, 44, 72; Devéria, _loc. cit._ p.
58 ff.

[24] P. 98.

[25] Gutschmid in the "Philologus," 10, 672.

[26] The number of 113 generations, which Syncellus gives as
contemporaneous, does not in the least agree with the accounts of
Manetho; moreover, Gutschmid has shown from what items the number 3,555
in Syncellus has arisen in "Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Orients,"
s. 9.

[27] On this rests the difference of the systems of Lepsius and Bunsen.
Taking the total given by Syncellus from Manetho of 3,555 years before
Nektanebös, Lepsius arrives at the years 3,892 B.C. Bunsen also
considers the number 3,555 to be from Manetho, but without historical
value. He insists on this number because he allows Manetho to reckon
1,286 years for the new monarchy, 922 years for the Hyksos, and 1,347
years for the old monarchy; but for these 1,347 years he substitutes the
1,076 years of Eratosthenes, in order to fix the historical accession of
Menes. According to this, Menes began to reign in the year 3284 B.C.
From this, Reinisch ("Zeitschrift der Deutschen morgenl. Gesell." 15,
251 ff.) has attempted to reconcile the systems of Bunsen and Lepsius.
He retains the total of 3,555 years, and the year 3,892 B.C. for Menes;
to the 1,076 years given by Eratosthenes for the old monarchy he adds
four years for Skemiophris, thus making 1,080 years, fixes the middle
monarchy--the Hyksos--at 1,088 years, or down to the era [Greek: apo
Menophreôs] at 1,490, and the new monarchy down to Nektanebos at 985
years.

[28] Boeckh, "Manetho," s. 411; Lepsius, "Chronologie," s. 148 ff. Th.
Martin "Mém de l'Acad. d'Inscr," 1869 (8), 265 ff.

[29] Boeckh, "Manetho," s. 404. In the decree of Kanopus, belonging to
the ninth year of the reign of Ptolemy Euergetes, _i.e._ to the year 238
B.C., we find as follows (Lepsius, "Das Bilingue Decret von Kanopus"):
"In order that the seasons of the year may continue to observe their
time according to the present arrangement of the world, and that feasts
which ought to be celebrated in winter may not be celebrated in summer,
because the star advances one day in every four years, while others
which are celebrated in summer will in later times be celebrated in
winter, as has already happened, and will happen again, if the year is
to be composed of 360 days, and the five days usually added, from
henceforth a day shall be kept as the festival of the Divi Euergetes,
every fourth year after the intercalary days, before the new year." That
the discovery of the want of a quarter of a day was made before the time
of Ptolemæus Euergetes I., and that for a long time computations were
made by the fixed year with an intercalary cycle every fourth year, as
well as by the movable year, is beyond doubt. The decree did not become
of universal application till 26 B.C.

[30] Herod. 2, 142.

[31] Boeckh, "Manetho," s. 36; Lepsius, "Chronologie," s. 193.

[32] According to Boeckh's "Kanon des Africanus."

[33] Lepsius, "Königsbuch," s. 118. Biot, "L'Année vague," p. 57; cf.
however H. Martin, "Mém. de l'Acad. des Inscript." 1869, pp. 1, 8, 265.




CHAPTER III.

THE RELIGION OF THE EGYPTIANS.


Next to its language the oldest possession of a nation is its religion.
Living in a country of very distinct outlines and characteristic forms,
where the regularity of external life is brought more prominently before
the view than in other countries, the Egyptians at an early period
arrived at a fixed expression of their religious feelings and of the
forms of their gods. Their original conceptions are unknown to us. The
oldest monuments, our earliest sources of information, present us with a
numerous assemblage of gods, and the conclusions drawn from these carry
us back to views far removed from primitive forms of worship. They
indicate a system already developed in the circle of the priests. We can
only attempt from the fragments of that system preserved in inscriptions
and manuscripts, and the very late accounts of the Greeks, to deduce
conclusions concerning the religious notions which originally
predominated.

The distinction in the nature of the upper and lower valley, already
referred to, cannot have been without influence upon the direction of
civic life among the Egyptians, and the formation of their religious
ideas. So far as we can tell, these developed independently at the same
time in the upper and lower country. In both districts peculiar forms
were retained at the most prominent centres of religious worship, until
after the union of the country they became amalgamated in all essential
points.

Memphis worshipped the god Ptah. The great sanctuary of the god at that
city was held to be as ancient as the city itself. So far back as our
knowledge extends, the Pharaohs were occupied with the extension and
adornment of this temple. Among the Greeks the god of Memphis was known
as Hephæstus: they tell us he was represented in the temple by a
dwarf-like image; and that similar images of the children of Ptah stood
in a part of the temple only entered by the priests.[34] The name
Hephæstus, and the further statement of the Greeks, that this god was
the father of the Sun-god, prove that in Ptah the Egyptians worshipped
not only fire, but the spirit of warmth and light generally; and that
they must have regarded him as the origin and source of light.

Manetho puts Ptah at the head of the dynasties of the gods. He ruled for
9,000 years before the other gods. Inscriptions name Ptah "the lord of
truth," the "father of truth," the "ruler of the sky," "the king of both
worlds." As the god of the light which shows everything in its true
form, he is the spirit of truth; as the spirit of the light in the sky,
he is the lord of heaven. The inscriptions also say that Ptah "moves the
egg of the sun and the moon;" he is called "the weaver of the
beginnings," the "god who rolls his egg in the sky." Consequently, to
the Egyptians Ptah was the mover of the luminaries, a formative,
creative spirit, and as he is called in the inscriptions "the father of
the father of the gods," he must have been to them the first and oldest
god, the beginning of the gods and of all things.

The Egyptians believed that a kind of beetle peculiar to their country
(_scarabæus sacer_) was propagated without the female sex; they saw the
mode of its reproduction in the balls of dung which the beetles
occasionally pushed before them. Hence they consecrated this insect to
their god of beginning and creation, and on monuments and records we
find the god Ptah with a beetle on his shoulders, in the place of a
human head. As the god of the beginning he appears on monuments in the
shape of a child or dwarf; and again, as the unchangeable god, he is
wrapped in the casings of a mummy, with the symbols of dominion, the
whip and sceptre, or the so-called Nile-gauge, a ring with parallel
cross bars, in his hand, in order to denote him as the god who gives to
all things measure, order, and law. He is also coloured green, to
signify, as it would seem, that lie is a god favourable to vegetation,
and possessed of a fertilising power.

Thus Ptah was one of the forms under which the Egyptians invoked the
creator, the highest god. On a pillar of Memphis, now in the Berlin
Museum, belonging to the time of the nineteenth dynasty, he is called
"the only unbegotten begetter in the heaven and on the earth," "the god
who made himself to be god, who exists by himself, the double being, the
begetter of the first beginning." Other inscriptions and records denote
him as "the creator in heaven and on earth, who has made all things, the
lord of all that is, and is not."[35]

Below Memphis lay On, the city of the sun (Heliopolis). Here the spirit
of the sun, Ra, was the pre-eminent god. In Manetho's list Ra succeeds
Ptah in the kingdom. "The Egyptians," says Plutarch, "regard the sun as
the body of the beneficent power, the visible form of a being only
comprehensible to thought. The morning sun they represented as a
new-born child seated on a lotus leaf, and thrice each day--at sunrise,
noon, and sunset--they offered incense to Helius."[36] We also find that
the Egyptians represented the sun of the winter months as a little
child, the sun of the vernal equinox as a youth, that of the summer
solstice as a bearded man, and again, the sun of the autumnal equinox as
an old man.[37] Hence they looked at the yearly course of the sun under
the allegory of human life. Plutarch's remark about the morning sun
shows that they regarded the daily course of the sun from the same point
of view, and when he tells us that according to Egyptian story, Apopis
made war against the god of the sky,[38] his statements are confirmed by
the monuments. According to the inscriptions Ra is "revealed in the
abyss of the sky," he is throned "in the orb of the sun," "he moves his
egg." "A Supplication to Ra"--such are the words of a prayer--"who each
day by himself brings himself to a new birth. Ra has created all that is
in the abysses of the sky."[39] In the tombs of the Ramesids, at Thebes,
the course of the sun is represented by the hour of the day and night.
On the form of the blue outstretched goddess of the sky appears the boat
of the sun, for the Egyptians conceived the sun as navigating the air in
a skiff, as they navigated the Nile; and in the boat is Ra, a child with
finger in mouth at the first hour of the morning. As the day goes on the
child increases in size, and at every hour the spirits who lead the boat
are changed. In the hours of the afternoon the evil serpent, Apep, the
darkness, the Apopis of Plutarch, attempts to swallow the sun, but
twelve spirits draw the serpent by ropes to the side. In the hours of
the night the sun-god is inclosed in his shrine on the boat, which is
carried along by spirits changing every hour over the waters of the
under world to the east--just as the boats on the Nile are drawn against
the stream--so that he may again shine out in the east on the next
morning. The hieroglyphics accompanying the navigation of the night
hours contain seventy-four invocations of Ra in Amenti, _i.e._ in his
concealment. In a similar way the monuments of Edfu exhibit the growth
of the sun-god through the twelve hours of the day from a child to a
youth and a man, and an old man bowed with age, leaning upon a staff.
This last is called in the inscriptions, "The old man who becomes again
a child."[40]

The monuments exhibit Ra in red, with the sun's orb on his head, a
sceptre in one hand, and the symbol of life in the other. The cat, the
tawny bull, and the hawk are the chosen creatures of Ra; often he is
found on the monuments with the head of a hawk in the place of the human
head, or as a hawk carrying the sun's orb. All the entrances of the
temple and the pylons display the symbolical form of the deity, the
sun's orb, supported by two wings. From the sun-god the kings of Egypt
derived their might and power. They generally call themselves "the sons
of Ra," and they rule over Egypt as Ra rules over the world.

Hence we can assume that to the minds of the priests Ptah was
essentially the deity of beginning, the first originator of creation. Ra
again was the propagating and sustaining power of the divinity embodied
in the sun.

At Hermopolis (Ashmunein), besides Thoth, whom the Greeks compared to
their Hermes, and the inscriptions name the "Lord of divine truth," the
"scribe of truth," to whom the white Ibis with black neck and beak is
sacred, the "children of Ptah" were worshipped. These were eight gods in
four pairs. Owing to this worship Hermopolis was known to the Egyptians
as Pe-sesennu, _i.e._ "the city of reverence." These children of Ptah
seem to have been spirits of the elements. In an inscription at Edfu we
find, "The eight gods, the very great, who are from the beginning,
created before the gods, the children of Ptah, arising through him,
begotten of him, to take possession of the south and the north, to
create in the Thebaid, and fashion in the land of Memphis. When they
arose the stream flowed out from the young waters, the child of the
lotus flower rose up in the boat, the beautiful one, making this earth
bright by his beams."[41]

At Sais, at Buto, on the Sebennytic mouth, and at Bubastis (Tel Basta),
on the Pelusiac arm of the Nile, female goddesses were worshipped. To
the feast of the goddess of Sais, whom the Greeks called Athene, the
Egyptians came from the whole country, as Herodotus tells us, to Sais,
and lighted lamps on the appointed night, and even those who did not
come to Sais lit lamps, so that lamps were burning throughout all
Egypt.[42] Jamblichus and Proclus tell us that the goddess of Sais, the
Neith of the Egyptians, was the mother of the sun-god; the inscriptions
call Neith "the cow which bore the sun," "ancient mother of the sun,"
"mother of the gods." Hence we may assume that Neith was associated with
Ptah, whose green colour she shares on the monuments; and that the
creative power of nature was personified in her under a female form. The
feast of lamps may have symbolised the birth of light, and its rise from
the darkness.[43] The goddess of Buto, who was also worshipped at
Letopolis, near Memphis, was compared by the Greeks with their goddess
Leto, whose child was Apollo, the spirit of light, because at Buto the
victorious god of light of the Egyptians, of whom we shall speak below,
was said to have grown up.[44]

The sanctuary of the goddess at Bubastis was, according to Herodotus'
account, the most delightful, though not the largest or most costly, in
the whole of Egypt. It was situated in the middle of the city, and could
be seen from every side. "Beyond the market-place a paved road, about
forty feet in width, leads to the shrine, which is overshadowed by trees
on both sides. The precincts, a place of about a stadium square, is
surrounded with a trench one hundred feet broad; this is connected with
the Nile, and also planted with trees. The portico is ten fathoms high,
and adorned with statues six cubits in height, and well worth
description. On the external walls pictures are everywhere engraved, and
the temple in which the statue of the goddess stands is also surrounded
by very lofty trees. At the festival of the goddess the Egyptians from
all the land go down in boats to Bubastis: in every boat is a number of
men and women; some of the men blow the flute; some of the women have
castanets, and strike them; the rest sing and clap their hands. The boat
touches at every city on the river bank; and here also the women sing
and strike their castanets, while others follow the women of the city
with shouts and raillery; others, again, dance; others expose
themselves. On arriving at Bubastis, they bring large offerings to the
goddess, and drink more wine at this festival than in all the rest of
the year. According to the accounts of the Egyptians, about 700,000 men
and women are collected at this festival, without counting children.[45]

Herodotus calls the goddess of Bubastis Artemis: her Egyptian name was
Bast and Pacht; and the city was called after her Pa-Bast, _i.e._ "abode
of Bast." On monuments this goddess has the sun's disk upon her head,
or, in the place of a human head, the head of a cat, which animal was
sacred to her. At Heliopolis there was a picture of Ra in the form of a
he-cat;[46] and in the inscription Pacht is called the daughter of Ra.
Ra was invoked to come to the help of his daughter, the holy she-cat,
who was panic-stricken by the snake which approached heaven in order to
tread upon the path of the sun-god, and to defile the limbs of the holy
she-cat.[47] In the sketches in the "Book of the Dead" we find a
she-cat, with the right forefoot upon the head of a serpent, and in the
left a broad knife, with which she is cutting off the head of the
serpent.[48] The account given by Herodotus of the customs observed at
the festival are confirmed from other sources. The monuments exhibit
musicians, whose music is accompanied by the audience with clapping of
the hands; and Plutarch describes the castanets of the Egyptians adorned
with the figure of a human-headed she-cat, the sound of which was
intended to scare away the evil spirit.[49]

In the upper country other deities were worshipped. At Thebes, Amun,
known to the Greeks as Ammon, took the place occupied by Ptah at
Memphis. Hecatæus of Abdera relates that the Egyptians identified their
supreme god with the universe, but the god was invisible and
concealed.[50] Amun, as a fact, signifies "the concealed" or "veiled."
The monuments of Thebes exhibit him as a creative god with the Phallus,
as a ruling deity either standing or sitting on a throne; on his royal
head-dress are two upright feathers, which to the Egyptians were the
symbol of dominion over the upper and under world, and in his hand are
the sceptre and the symbol of life. His colour is blue. By his side
stands the goddess Mut; the "mother," the "lady of darkness," as the
inscriptions[51] style her. She wears on her head the vulture, or the
crown of Upper Egypt. She is also found on inscriptions with the head of
a vulture, the bird sacred to her, instead of a human head; and in
pictures of battles the vulture of Mut hovers over the Pharaoh as the
symbol of protection. The son of Ammon and Mut is Shu (Sosis, Sos), the
spirit of the atmosphere, "the bearer of heaven," as the inscriptions
name him.[52] This (Thinis) and Abydus were the chief seats of his
worship. In Manetho's list the reign of Shu follows on those of Ptah and
Ra.

In the place of Ammon we often find another divinity, Tum (Atmu.) This
was the sun-god in a special form. In Upper Egypt the spirit of the sun
was invoked under the names Tum and Mentu. Of these names the first
signified the declining sun, the sun of the west, the sun of
concealment, the sun in the under world; the second the rising sun, the
sun of the east, the sun of the day, the bright sun-god. Tum also wears
the double crown, and the two feathers of Ammon, or in the place of them
the two royal serpents round his head-dress; he also is lord of both
kingdoms. Like Ptah, he is "the father of beginnings, who begot
himself," "the father of the gods;" like him also he is formed with the
beetle in the place of the human head; as the creative god he is the
creator of his name, _i.e._ of his properties; he is the primæval night,
the darkness of the beginning, before light existed. To him also
belonged the primæval water. According to Plutarch, the Egyptians
believed that the sun arose out of moisture, that it sprang up out of
water, and was nourished by it, and therefore water was the beginning
and origin of things. This account is confirmed by the monuments. As
light in the process of production, Tum is called "Ra in his egg;" and
as the spirit of light arising out of darkness and water, the horologe
and the sun-dial are his insignia.[53]

At Coptus, in Upper Egypt, a phallic god was worshipped under the name
Chem, whom the Greeks compared to their god Pan, and at the falls of
Syene a ram-headed god, Chnum (Chnemu, Chnuphis, Kneph), who in
inscriptions is named the lord of the "inundations," of the "outpouring
of the waters."[54] As a giver of fruits, the colour of his pictures on
the monuments is generally green. In the eyes of the inhabitants of
Upper Egypt Chnum was, according to the account of Plutarch, an
uncreated eternal spirit.[55] We must therefore regard him as a peculiar
form of the life-giving god. Chnum was often united with Ammon, inasmuch
as the latter assumes the attributes of Chnum, the ram's horns or even
head.[56] As the worship of Ammon passed beyond Egypt up the Nile as far
as Meroe, so the worship of Ammon-Chnum spread westward in the Libyan
desert as far as the oasis of Siwa, where the inhabitants were called by
the Greeks Ammonians. Here, even now, in the vicinity of a clear pool
surrounded by lofty palms, the remains of a considerable temple are to
be seen, with hieroglyphic inscriptions, and the picture of the
ram-headed deity.[57]

The worship of the goddess Hathor was widely diffused both in Upper and
Lower Egypt. The most renowned seats of the cultus were Aphroditopolis,
near Memphis; Edfu and Dendera, in Upper Egypt. She is called in the
inscriptions "the lady of the dance and revel," and is represented on
the monuments with fetters and a tambourine in her hands. From this and
from her Grecian name we may conclude that she was the Egyptian goddess
of love, of the enchaining passion; but though we find in her form
hints of a more individual and lively fancy, the natural power of
maternity in general is by far the most prominent conception. She is
represented with the horns of a cow--her sacred animal--on her head, and
between them the moon's disk; or entirely as a cow. In the rock-temple
at Abusimbel, which the wife of Ramses II. dedicated to Hathor, she is
represented as a cow in a boat, over which water-plants meet in arches.
To this cow the king and queen offer flowers and fruits.[58] In the
temple at Edfu, a structure of the Ptolemies, 360 local forms of Hathor
are said to have been enumerated and among these seven were especially
prominent.

It was the beneficent, creative, and life-giving powers of nature which
the Egyptians worshipped in these divinities--water, light, the clear
heaven, the sun, the powers of reproduction and birth. But the phenomena
and the powers presented by nature were not in every case beneficent.
Night swallowed up day, and death swallowed up life. Beside the waters
and the black fruitful soil of Egypt lay the boundless yellow desert,
from which storms blew the sand into the green valley. In the hot
months, the sun blazed with a devouring and scorching heat, the flowers
withered; and the powers of nature failed in the winter. Thus in the
life of nature there was a strife between malignant and beneficent
powers, a strife in which nevertheless the beneficent powers always
gained the upper hand. Out of night arose a new day; out of the death of
nature in winter blossomed forth new increase, fruitfulness, and life.
Through this conception of a strife raging between the healing and
destructive powers of nature, by regarding nature as moving in a
circular course from life to death, and death to life, the Egyptians
succeeded in making a great advance in their religious ideas. They
personified this strife in certain divine forms. The beneficent power,
the divinity of life was allowed to succumb, and then to rise from
apparent death into a new life. Only for a moment could the evil powers
vanquish the good; the eternal victory remained with the gods of
beneficence.

After Helius, Hephæstus, Ammon, and Hermes, says Diodorus,[59] Cronos
and his sister Rhea ruled. These became the parents of Isis and Osiris,
of Typhon, Apollo, and Aphrodite. Plutarch tells us that, according to
the legend of the Egyptians, Rhea and Cronos were the parents of Osiris
and Isis, of Typhon and Nephthys. Osiris ruled happily over Egypt; but
Typhon conspired against him with seventy-two associates; they inclosed
Osiris in a chest and threw it into the Nile, and the stream carried it
down to the sea. When Isis heard of it, she put on mourning, and sought
with lamentation the body of Osiris. At last she found the chest in the
neighbourhood of Byblus, where the sea had cast it up; she mourned over
the corpse and carried it back to Egypt. And when Horus, the son of Isis
and Osiris, who grew up in Buto, came to his full strength, he prepared
to avenge the wrong which Typhon had done to his father and mother.
Thrice he fought with Typhon; the battle raged for many days, and Horus
conquered.[60]

According to the accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus, Osiris (Dionysus)
and Horus (the Apollo of the Greeks) were the last rulers of the divine
race.[61] In the list of Manetho, Ptah was followed in the kingdom by
Ra and Shu (or, according to the Theban account, by Ammon, Tum, and
Shu), Cronos, Osiris, Typhon, and Horus. These then are the younger
gods; the evidence of the monuments shows that they were connected by
race with each other, but not akin to the three gods who ruled before
them. And as we also find that the five supplementary days added in the
Egyptian year to the original number of 360 (p. 29) were dedicated to
these gods, the first to Osiris, the second to Horus, the third to
Typhon, the fourth to Isis, the fifth to Nephthys--the natural
conclusion is that these gods were of later origin.[62] On the other
hand it is clear that the belief in Osiris and his power had already
arisen at the time when the great pyramids were erected.

The two gods at the head of this circle, whom Diodorus and Plutarch call
Cronos and Rhea, were known to the Egyptians under the names Seb and
Nut.[63] They are the spirits of the earth and sky. Osiris himself in
the inscriptions and records is called "the king of the gods," "the lord
of unnumbered days," "the king of life," "the regulator of eternity."
The inscription on the lid of a coffin runs thus--"Ra gave thee the
richly streaming light which gleams in thy eyes. Shu gave thee the
pleasant air which in thy lifetime was inhaled in thy nostrils. Seb gave
thee all fruits whereon thou livest. Osiris gave thee the Nile-water
whereon thou livest."[64] As a life-giving god, the colour of Osiris is
green; his sacred tree is the evergreen tamarisk; and his sacred bird a
kind of heron, distinguished by two long feathers at the back of the
head. Osiris is always represented in a human form, and with a human
head.

The chief seats of the worship of Osiris were Philæ and Abydus, in Upper
Egypt. In the temple on the island of Philæ, formed by the Nile above
Syene, the history of the god was represented.[65] On a little island
close by, where only the priests might tread, lay the grave of Osiris,
overshadowed by tamarisks;[66] here were libations offered to him, and
Diodorus tells us that in Upper Egypt no more sacred form of oath was
known than the oath by Osiris who rests at Philæ.[67] In the temple of
Osiris at Abydus (Arabat-el-Medfuneh) the wealthy Egyptians sought to be
buried, that they might rest in the vicinity of the god's grave. In
Lower Egypt Osiris[68] was worshipped in the cities of Memphis,
Sais,[69] and Busiris. At Busiris (the name Pe-osiri meant "abode of
Osiris"), on the Sebennytic arm of the Nile, in the middle of the
Delta--it was the chief city of the district of Busiris--was situated
the largest temple of Isis, as we learn from Herodotus, and here also,
according to other evidence, the grave of Osiris was to be found.[70]
Here the whole land worshipped this god and goddess.[71] Thousands of
men and women assembled, according to Herodotus, made lamentation for
Osiris, and brought an offering to the greatest goddess (Isis). Amid
prayers the bull was flayed, the thighs and other parts cut out, and a
part of the belly filled with bread, honey, and incense; these were
drenched plentifully with oil, and set on fire, and so long as the
sacrifice burned the people lamented. When the lamentation ended, the
remainder of the sacrifice was eaten.[72] Plutarch says that with Osiris
the Egyptians lamented the receding of the Nile, the ceasing of the cool
north wind, the death of vegetation, and decrease in the length of the
day. On the 17th Athyr, the day on which Typhon slew Osiris (on this day
the sun passes through the Scorpion), the priests instituted rites of
lamentation, and, among other things, as a sign of the sorrow of Isis,
they exhibited for four days a gilded cow, covered with a black veil of
byssus--for the cow was the Egyptian symbol of this goddess. On the
19th Athyr, in the night, they went down to the sea, and the priests
brought out the chest, and the congregation cried, "Osiris is
found!"[73] Moreover, according to Plutarch, the holy rites represented
the burial of Osiris: in these the wood was cut for the chest, the linen
torn for cerements, and libations poured. A serpent was also slain in
effigy.[74] About the time of the winter solstice, as Plutarch tells us
in another place, the Egyptians carried "the cow," _i.e._ Isis, seven
times round the temple, and this procession was called the search for
Osiris.[75] On the monuments the Isis worshipped with Osiris appears
generally in a youthful shape, with the horns of a cow on her head, the
moon's disk between the horns, with the flower-sceptre and symbol of
life in her hands. The inscriptions denote her as the "royal consort,"
the "great goddess." An image in which she was represented in the form
of a cow was seen by Herodotus in the royal palace of the last Pharaohs
at Sais. "In a beautifully-adorned chamber lay the wooden image of a
cow, resting on her knees, not larger than a full-grown cow. The body
was covered with a purple robe; on the neck and head could be seen the
thick gilding, and between the horns a golden disk. Every day incense
was burned before the image; and at night a lamp was kindled before it.
Once a year," continues Herodotus, "this cow was carried out into the
open, when the Egyptians lamented the god, whose name I do not think
proper to mention now."[76]

Osiris and Isis, the spirits of blessing and life, were attacked by
Typhon. Plutarch observes that the Egyptians called Typhon Set,[77] and
this statement is confirmed by the inscriptions. The colour of Set was
burning red,[78] like the glowing sun in the dust of the desert; the ass
was the sacred animal of this god, and a peculiarly-formed animal his
symbol on the monuments. In poisonous serpents also the Egyptians saw
this destructive deity, and they brought the crocodile and hippopotamus
into association with him. The third of the five additional days of the
year (p. 29), which belonged to Set, was to the Egyptians an unlucky
day.[79] On a papyrus he is called "the almighty destroyer and
blighter,"[80] and with this agrees the statement of Plutarch, that
Typhon, according to the Egyptians, had filled the whole earth and
sea--which they call "the foam of Typhon"--with evils; and they
considered all animals, trees, and vegetables, all incidents of a
harmful and destructive nature to be works, parts and actions of
Typhon.[81]

The evil god can limit and overcome the beneficent power of nature, but
not for ever. Osiris had left behind a young son, who could hold Typhon
in check, though unable to suppress him entirely. Horus, as Plutarch
tells us, was born about the time of the winter solstice, and the
festival of the delivery of Isis was celebrated at the time of the
vernal equinox.[82] On the monuments we find Horus (Har), "the avenger
of his father Osiris," as the inscriptions call him, represented as a
naked child, with finger on lip, sitting on a lotus-leaf, or on a crook,
the symbol of dominion. Hence he is the young Horus, the Harpocrates of
the Greeks, the Harpechruti--_i.e._, "Har, the child"--of the Egyptians.
Then, according to the legend, he grows up at Buto; he becomes a
handsome youth, the strong Horus (Har-ver, Arveris of the Greeks), the
"great helper," the "pillar of the world." In the temple at Philæ we see
him pouring libations before the bier of Osiris; on other monuments he
guides the sun's bark through the hours of the day.[83] At Hermopolis,
as Plutarch tells us, a hippopotamus was to be seen, on which a
hawk--the sacred bird of Horus, in which form the god is often
represented--fought with a serpent; and, according to the belief of the
Egyptians, Typhon escaped from Horus in the shape of a crocodile.[84]
The monuments represent Horus on the sun-boat in the act of stabbing a
serpent with a human head,[85] _i.e._, Apopis, the serpent Apep; or
standing on crocodiles with serpents in his hands; or as a winged sun's
disk contending with a hippopotamus. In an invocation of Horus,
belonging to the fourth century B.C., we find the following: "Come to me
quickly on this day to guide the holy bark (the sun's-boat), to force
back all lions to the land of Egypt, and all crocodiles into the Nile.
Shamelessness and sin (?) come and appear upon earth; but when Horus is
invoked he destroys them. All mankind rejoice when they see the sun.
They praise the son of Osiris, and the serpent turns back."[86] Hence to
the Egyptians Horus was the triumphant god of light (Har-phre,
Horus-sun), who subdues gloom, and winter, and drought. As a victorious
god arousing fresh life, he gives to the kings of Egypt life and
victory. The Greeks called the Egyptian Ra Helius, and Horus Apollo; and
these names correspond to the Egyptian conception of these deities. The
chief seats of the worship of Horus were the two cities which the Greeks
called the great and little cities of Apollo (Edfu and Kus) and Ombus.
At Edfu Hathor was worshipped beside Horus (p. 52).

Plutarch tells us that Isis, in the minds of the Egyptians, was the
female receptive part of nature. Osiris was the light, Typhon the
darkness, the obscuration of the sun and the moon; Osiris was the
fruit-giving Nile-water, Typhon the salt and barren sea; Osiris was
moisture, Typhon drought, the parching wind, which overcomes and
consumes moisture; Osiris was health, Typhon disease; Osiris was the
orderly, unchanging; Typhon the passionate, irrational, and giant-like;
disturbances, blight, and tempest.[87] It is incorrect, Plutarch
observes, in conclusion, to call water, the sun, or the earth and sky
Osiris and Isis; and not less so to call the glowing sun and hot wind
Typhon. If we merely ascribe to Typhon all that is immoderate or
irregular in these, whether in the way of excess or defect, and hold in
reverence and honour all that is orderly and good and useful as the work
of Isis, as the image, likeness, and essence of Osiris, we shall hardly
go wrong.[88]

Thus there can be little doubt about the meaning of the myth. When the
Nile receded and the sirocco from the south drove back the refreshing
north wind, when the hot days--for these are the seventy-two
fellow-conspirators of Typhon--parched up the soil; then had Typhon
struck down Osiris. Then, as Plutarch says, "the Egyptians bewailed the
decay of the fruits, and prayed the gods to send new in the place of
those that were gone, and allow them to spring forth again." When the
seed was cast into the ground, the Egyptians buried Osiris: but the
sacred rites were an imitation of the sufferings of Isis, and the
incidents which occurred when the body was deposited in the tomb. The
progressive decay of productive power towards the north during the hot
days, and the winter, which was indicated in the myth by the carrying of
the corpse of Osiris to the sea, and the custom of carrying the chest to
the coast (p. 57), is part of the Egyptian conception; that Isis
discovers the body at Byblus on the Phenician coast is probably an
invention of the Greeks, who confounded the Phenician horned goddess
Astarte, Ashtaroth Karnaim, with Isis. When Egypt was again fertilised
by the inundation, when the days began to lengthen after the winter
solstice, when the sun shone with fresh brightness, and the new fruit
budded forth, then Horus, the child born about the winter solstice,
waxed strong at Buto in the north of Egypt--then he overcame Typhon. The
renewed power of the sun, the returning life of nature, the fresh
blessings of the new year--these are the avenging son of Osiris.

When the creative and receptive powers of nature had thus been
comprehended in the forms of Osiris and Isis, the divinities in whom
creative power and receptivity had hitherto been perceived naturally
coalesced with these forms to a greater or less degree. Thus Ptah of
Memphis, Tum of Thebes, the sun-god of Heliopolis, are combined with
Osiris (the title Ptah-Osiris is not uncommon in the inscriptions,)
though they are also retained as separate deities. Thus also Isis is
identified with Neith of Sais, with Mut of Thebes, with Hathor, with
Bast,[89] the goddess of Bubastis. Horus, again, is identified with Chem
and Ra, though at the same time his personality as the youthful,
vigorous spirit of light is strongly marked. Plutarch is certainly right
in his remark that the Egyptians regard Osiris as the personification of
everything in heaven and the under world.[90] All the other deities were
transfigurations and manifestations of Osiris, mere modifications of his
nature. When Osiris is called the soul of Ra,[91] this can hardly have
any other meaning but this, that the appearance of the sun-god in the
visible world is an incarnation of the invisible nature of Osiris.

The Egyptians often represented their deities with the heads, or in the
shape of, the animals sacred to them; that is, they recognised the
nature of the deities who were primarily conceived under the form of
men, in the races of the beasts which they allotted to them. To the
Egyptians these animals must have appeared so closely and intimately
connected with the deity to which they belonged, that the nature of the
deity was better expressed and made more visible in the shape of the
beast than in the shape of man. We must assume that the predominance of
a distinct mark or characteristic property in the races of animals, that
their simple, uniformly instinctive life created this conception in the
mind of the Egyptians, to whom a fixed and unalterable course of action,
an unchanging and typical nature, was the ideal. The force of nature,
the regular recurrence of certain phenomena, coalesced in the Egyptian
mind with the blind, unchanging action of animals. Yet animals were also
seen to possess freedom and movement, and an individual existence. This
combination of the type and the individual must have seemed to the
Egyptians to correspond to the nature of their deities. The mystery of
life, the natural law, which lay at the base of their worship, must for
them have reached its most distinct and lively realisation in these
animals.

The bull is the sacred animal of the creative gods: the cow of the
goddesses of birth and receptivity; the ram is sacred to Chnum; the hawk
and the cat to the deities of light and the sun; the beetle to Ptah; a
kind of heron to Osiris; the vulture to Ptah and Isis; a kind of ibis to
Thoth; the dog-ape to Anubis, the "ruler in the west;[92]" the crocodile
to the god Sebek, who was worshipped at Arsinoe, &c., &c. Herodotus
tells us that when a cat died in a house, all the inhabitants shaved
their eyebrows; and that at conflagrations the Egyptians directed all
their attention to saving the cats, not to quenching the flames, and if,
in spite of their efforts, a cat leapt into the flames and was burnt,
the Egyptians made a great lamentation.[93] "To each of the races of the
sacred animals," says Diodorus, "a certain piece of land is consecrated,
the products of which suffice for the food and tending of the race.
Those entrusted with the care of each race have to feed them. To feed
the hawks they cut up pieces of flesh, and call loudly to the birds till
they come and take their food. The cats they coax by giving them bread
and milk, or chopped fish from the Nile, and thus provide them with
suitable food. These duties they do not scruple to perform before the
whole people; on the contrary, they are proud of them as of the highest
offices which they can attain to in the service of the gods. With
special symbols to distinguish them, they proceed through town and
country, and as it is known from the symbols what animal it is whose
servants are approaching, all who meet them bow the knee and pay homage.
If one of the animals dies, it is wrapped in a costly covering, and,
amid loud lamentations and beating of the breast, it is carried away to
embalment. Steeped in oil of cedar, or any other kind remarkable for its
scent and powers of preservation, the corpse is then buried in the holy
sepulchres. Anyone who intentionally kills a sacred animal is punished
with death; and everyone who has caused the death of an ibis or a cat,
intentionally or unintentionally, must die, and is often killed in the
most cruel manner, without any sentence passed upon him, by the
collected mob. So deeply rooted is the reverence for sacred animals in
the feeling of the people, so persistently does everyone cling to the
worship of them, that even at the time when Ptolemy was not yet declared
an ally by the Romans, and the nation was most anxious to pay respect to
visitors from Italy, and to give no cause for war, when a Roman had
unintentionally killed a cat, the mob gathered at his house, and neither
the officers sent by the king to quiet them, nor the prevailing awe of
the Romans, could protect him from their vengeance. This fact I have not
received from hearsay: I was in Egypt and saw the occurrence. But what
is done for the animals which are kept in the temples is easy to
narrate, but difficult for anyone to believe who has not seen it."[94]

Among the races of animals which, according to Egyptian belief, shared
in the nature of the deities to which they were sacred, were certain
pre-eminent specimens. These were recognised by certain signs by the
priests, and passed for a special incarnation of the deity. They were
brought into his temple, and there worshipped and prayed to as his
manifestation. The most sacred among these selected animals was Apis,
the bull, in the temple of Ptah, at Memphis. According to the account of
Herodotus, the Egyptians believed that a ray of light from heaven had
impregnated the cow, which brought forth an Apis: by Plutarch, the
impregnation is said to take place by a ray of the moon.[95] The priests
recognized Apis in a black bull, which had a triangular white spot on
the forehead, a fleshy growth under the tongue in the form of the sacred
beetle of Ptah, white spots on his back in the shape of an eagle, and
bi-coloured hairs in the tail.[96] When an Apis was found, he was, says
Diodorus, in the first place brought for forty successive days to the
meadow of the "city of the Nile" (Nilopolis), where women were shown to
him, who were afterwards excluded from the sight of the Apis. Then he
was conveyed on a boat in a golden shrine like a god to the temple of
Ptah, at Memphis. There he was bathed in the holy place, and anointed,
and the most precious frankincense was constantly burned before him. He
received the most beautiful garments, the richest bedding-places, and
the most handsome cows as his "bed-fellows"; the most distinguished men
provided him with the best food at a very great expense. When the Apis
died of old age he was honoured with a splendid funeral. "When, on the
death of Alexander, Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, made himself master of
Egypt, it happened that the Apis died, and the person entrusted with his
care not only spent his own large fortune upon his burial, but borrowed,
in addition, fifty talents from Ptolemy. Even in my own times certain
feeders of the sacred animals have spent not less than one hundred
talents on a single funeral."[97]

"The Egyptians," Diodorus remarks, "are of opinion that the soul of the
dead Osiris passed into this bull, and thus continues among them, and
will so continue among their descendants." Plutarch says that the Apis
at Memphis was an image of the soul of Osiris. According to the usual
account of the priests, Osiris and Apis were one; for they taught that
the Apis was to be regarded as a fair image of the soul of Osiris.
Strabo tells us, "The bull Apis, which is revered as a god, is the same
as Osiris. The temple in which the Apis was kept stands beside the
temple of Hephæstus (Ptah). There is also a temple of Serapis in that
city, before which we saw sphinxes, buried in the sand, some to the
middle, some to the neck."[98] Evidence from other sources, no less than
the monuments, confirms these accounts of Diodorus and Plutarch. The
monuments exhibit the Apis with the sun's disk and the royal serpent
between his horns, and Greek papyri tell us that the keeper with whom
the Apis was placed was known as the "Herdman of Osorapi," _i.e._ of
Osiris-Apis (Osarhapi).[99] We may assume that this Osorapi was the
Serapis or Sarapis of the Greeks, and the temple of Serapis a temple of
Osorapi. The sphinxes buried in sand at Memphis have been discovered on
the plateau on which the inhabitants buried their dead to the west of
the ruins of this city. They are found here in two rows as often before
the entrance of temples between Abusir and Sakkarah. It is by following
this path of sphinxes that the discoverers were recently enabled to find
the ruins of the temple of Serapis, _i.e._ the temple of the grave of
Osiris-Apis, and the sepulchral chambers of the Apis-bulls hewn in the
rocks around it. The oldest of the tombs hitherto opened belongs,
according to the inscriptions, to an Apis buried in the time of
Amenophis III. (1524-1488 B.C.). Above ground rises a massive structure,
truncated at the top, and decorated with reliefs. This is the mortuary
chapel. A sloping passage, the entrance to which lies before this
structure, leads beneath the earth to a sepulchral chamber, where stands
a sarcophagus with the mummy of the Apis. The relief on the structure
above exhibits the king bringing a drink-offering to the Apis. Beside
the picture of the bull we read, "The living Osiris, the lord of the
sky: he is Tum (p. 51): his feathers are upon him: he gives life for
evermore." On the sarcophagus of an Apis buried in a similar tomb in the
reign of Horus (1455-1443 B.C.), we read:--"Apis-Osiris, the great deity
who dwells in Amenti, the ever-living lord." King Ramses II. (1388-1322
B.C.), in the second half of his reign, caused a broad gallery to be
excavated under the rock, on both sides of which chambers of about
twenty feet high were subsequently cut out as occasion required; in
these were placed the remains of the dead Apis-bulls in sarcophagi of
basalt or granite. When the gallery of Ramses was no longer sufficient,
Psammetichus I. caused a gallery still larger and more beautiful to be
excavated, and provided with handsome cells. After Darius had extended
this second gallery, the bodies of the bulls were buried in the chambers
of it down to the times of the latest Ptolemies. As yet sixty-four tombs
in all have been discovered; but of these only four were uninjured. All
the rest had been already opened by the Arabs, plundered, and in part
destroyed. The inscriptions on the tombs in the galleries give the same
representation of the Apis as the older sepulchres. He is "the Osiris
again restored to life," the "revived Apis of Ptah," "the living Apis,
which is Osiris abiding in Amenti," the "second Ptah." On a sarcophagus
we read:--"Here is Osiris Apis, who dwells in Amenti, the great God, the
eternal Lord, the ruler for all time." Another inscription remarks "that
he had been sought for three months in the valleys of Upper Egypt, and
on the islands of Lower Egypt. When found he had been brought to his
throne in the temple, to his father Ptah, in such and such a year, on
such and such a day. The happy duration of his life had been
six-and-twenty years; then the deity had been carried to burial, as he
had established himself in the good Amenti in order to unite himself on
his eternal throne with the house of centuries." Or, as it is said in
another inscription, "the holiness of Apis has been brought to unite
himself with the good Amenti."[100]

By this constantly renewed incarnation in the form of a bull, the emblem
of generation, the god of life gave the Egyptians a guarantee for the
continuance of his grace, and the perpetuation of their life in this
world and the next. Whether other forms of incarnation beside this were
ascribed to the god cannot be determined.

At the time when the Nile began to rise, or shortly before it, there
appeared in Egypt from year to year a peculiar kind of heron,
distinguished by two long feathers on the back of the head.[101] This
was known to the Egyptians as Bennu. This bird, which announced or
caused the fertilisation or new life of the land, could not but belong
to the god of life. The whole race, or a select specimen, appears in
special connection with Osiris, and the temple at Heliopolis. In the
oldest portions of the Book of the Dead, which belong to the time of the
Amenemha and Sesurtesen, we find, "I am that great Bennu of On"
(Heliopolis); and the commentary adds, "Bennu is Osiris, viz., the
Osiris in On."[102] The inscriptions say of the great Bennu that "it was
self-begotten," that "it caused the divisions of time to arise."[103]
This production of himself signifies the creative power of Osiris, and
the origin of the seasons might well be attributed to the bird which
regularly appeared announcing the return of the period of fertilization.
With the cultus of the Bennu at Heliopolis is connected the story of the
phoenix. Herodotus tells us that he was informed by the inhabitants of
Heliopolis that a bird, which, if it resembled the pictures, was
gold-coloured and red, and like an eagle in shape and size, came from
Arabia to their city once in every 500 years, and buried the corpse of
his father in myrrh in the sanctuary of the sun-god.[104] From later
accounts we learn that the phoenix, on reaching the age of 500 years,
prepared a funeral pile of spices, and burned himself upon it; then he
recreated himself, and carried the remains of his old body to
Heliopolis.[105] Tacitus says: "In the consulship of Paulus Fabius and
Lucius Vitellius (_i.e._ in the year 34 A.D.) after a lapse of
centuries, the phoenix appeared in Egypt. This bird, which was sacred
to the sun, returned after an interval of 500 years, according to the
most common accounts; according to others after an interval of 1461
years. The first phoenix appeared in the reign of Sesostris; the
second under Amasis; the third in the time of the third Ptolemy; and as
there was only a lapse of 250 years between this Ptolemy and the reign
of Tiberius, some regarded the last phoenix as a spurious one."[106]
Ælian remarks: "The Egyptians are not agreed when the 500 years are
completed; and the priests were at variance whether the bird would
appear then or later, and when he ought to come; but amid their
dissensions the bird suddenly appeared at the right time."[107] Pliny
informs us that the cycle of the great year was connected with the life
of this bird, and with his return the stars came again into their old
position.[108] Horapollo maintains that the phoenix was a symbol of
the sun, and signified one who returned after a long time from a far
country.[109] There is no doubt, therefore, that the alleged appearance
of the phoenix signified to the Egyptians the close of an astronomical
period. On the monuments the planet Venus is described as the "star of
Bennu-Osiris." As the morning star announced the day, the light
returning out of darkness, it could easily be appropriated to Osiris,
and that period might be connected with the cycles of the planet
Venus.[110]

The selected cats of the sun-god and his daughter, the goddess of
Bubastis, the hawk of Horus, the ibis of Thoth, the vulture of Mut, were
regarded by the Egyptians with no less veneration than the bulls of
Osiris. In a hymn to a male cat, which was kept for Ra at
Heliopolis--the hymn is to be found on a memorial pillar of the fourth
century B.C.--we read: "Thy head is the head of the sun-god; thy nose is
the nose of Thoth, the twice mighty lord of Hermopolis. Thy ears are the
ears of Osiris, who hears the voice of all who call upon him; thy mouth
is the mouth of the god Tum, the lord of life, he has preserved thee
from every stain. Thy heart is the heart of Ptah; he has purified thee
from every stain of evil in thy members: thy teeth are the teeth of the
god Chunsu (the moon-god). Thy thighs are the thighs of the god Horus,
the avenger of his father Osiris, who has retaliated upon Set the
mischief he purposed against Osiris."[111] Selected crocodiles--and even
the crocodile was worshipped, at least in some regions, as in the
Thebais and around the lake of Moeris--were to be found at Thebes and
Arsinoe. "For both these animals," says Herodotus "(and they are so tame
that they allow themselves to be touched), the priests put ornaments of
glass and gold in their ears, and bracelets on their fore-feet, and give
them the best of food both of meal and from the sacrifices, and attend
to them with the utmost care. When they die they are embalmed, and
buried in the sacred tombs."[112] Strabo, who travelled through Egypt
more than four hundred years later than Herodotus, narrates that a
sacred crocodile was kept in the lake of Moeris, which was tame to the
priests. He was fed with the bread, wine, and flesh brought to him by
visitors. "Our host," Strabo continues, "a man of distinction at
Arsinoe, who showed us the sacred things of the city, took cakes, roast
meat, and a drink mixed with honey, and went with us to the lake. On the
shore lay the crocodile; the priests went up to him, two of them opened
his jaws; and the third put in first the cakes, then the meat, and last
of all he gave him the drink. Then the crocodile ran into the water and
swam to the opposite bank. Another stranger came with similar presents:
the priests took them, ran round the lake and offered them to the
crocodile, when they had found him, in the same manner as before."[113]
Clement of Alexandria describes the glory of the Egyptian temples, and
then continues thus: "The innermost shrine is veiled with a curtain of
cloth of gold; when the priest removes the veil you see a cat, a
crocodile, or a serpent of the land rolling on a purple coverlet."

According to the account of Herodotus, the dead cats were embalmed in
sacred tombs at Bubastis, the hawks at Buto, the ibis at
Hermopolis.[114] Mummies of cats have been discovered at Thebes and
Sheikhassan; mummies of bulls, cows, jackals, dogs, and vultures at
Thebes and Sioot; of hawks and ibises at Thebes, Hermopolis, Abydus, and
Memphis; of crocodiles at Thebes and Manfalut.[115]

This reverence for beasts, the excessive regard for the nourishment of
the sacred kinds and the preservation of their bodies, the offering of
prayers to them, the worship of bulls, birds, and crocodiles as living
gods, the royal honours with which these selected examples were buried,
would of necessity be regarded as a very rude superstition or degraded
fetichism, hardly compatible with the general level of civilisation and
culture in the country, had not the Egyptians united a deeper feeling
with their worship of animals. In the living and yet typical forms of
beasts as contrasted with the deadness of nature, they saw not only
creations of the deities, but manifestations of the divine life itself.
The consecrated race of animals participated in the nature of the god to
whom it belonged, and the specimens in the temples were an unbroken
series of incarnations of the deity.

In a different sense from the sacred animals, man also was in the eyes
of the Egyptians a manifestation of the divine life and nature. If we
set aside the position of the kings (see below), we find no indication
that man was regarded as the incarnation of particular deities or their
attributes. Yet man had a share in the immortality of the gods; and he
who studied and desired the divine was thought by his bodily death to
arrive at a complete divine existence. The primary result of this
feeling was that the body must be preserved as the vehicle of
personality even when life and soul have left it; it must be protected
from decay and ruin and any external disturbance by nature or man.
Beyond the reach of beasts of prey, safe from the enemy and the
destroyer, the corpses must rest uncorrupted and uninjured in cool,
secure, inaccessible, unpolluted, indestructible graves. No nation has
devoted so much care and labour to the preservation of the corpses,
whether of men or of sacred animals, as the Egyptians. It was almost the
first duty of the living to attend to the dead. And with his body must
be preserved all that the deceased person had done or acquired in life:
his occupation, his actions must live on in the grave, like his corpse.
Pictures in his tomb must represent his life, and inscriptions must give
an account of it. "The Egyptians," says Diodorus, "speak of the
dwellings of the living as a lodging; but of the tombs of the dead as
eternal habitations, because the dead pass an endless time in Hades.
Hence they bestow less toil upon their houses; but their tombs they
furnish in a most extraordinary manner."[116]

The tombs are always turned towards the west, and are deeply hollowed
out in soil, or hewn in the rocks of the Libyan mountains. Those of the
wealthier sort generally consist of two chambers, an upper and a lower,
or a front and a back one. The upper or front chamber is furnished with
a description of the life of the dead person, his possessions, his
office, his occupation, and the most important results of his life
exhibited in relief and pictures. It served as a chapel in which the
offerings to the dead were made. In the lower or hinder chamber lay the
corpse. The corpses of the poorer inhabitants found their resting-place
in the common sepulchres. The preservation of the corpse was
accomplished in various ways. Either the entrails were taken out through
an aperture and placed in separate vessels, or the corpse was protected
against corruption by the injection of various substances; or finally it
was allowed to lie for a considerable time in saltpetre.

Like the embalmment and the tomb, the cerements and the coffin were more
or less costly, according to the rank and wealth of the deceased. The
dead person was placed in a receptacle adapted to the shape of the
corpse, provided with a mask to represent his face, and adorned with
inscriptions and pictures. On the breast was generally depicted the
beetle of Ptah, or an open eye, the symbol of Osiris. This receptacle
was then placed in two or more coffins, each inclosing the other, which
were made of more or less costly wood. Rich persons added to their
coffins the stone sarcophagus, a hollow block of granite, the heavy lid
of which was then made so fast to the lower part that it could not be
opened without destroying the whole.

The sarcophagus was carried to the sepulchre in solemn procession, led
by the temple-servants, with the necessary implements, and the bull
destined for sacrifice to the dead. Next were seen the implements used
by the deceased in his lifetime; the insignia of his order, if he had
been a priest, or in any office; or, if he had held any military
command, his chariot followed. After this came the waiting-women, hired
for this purpose according to the custom of the East; and men with
palm-branches, the servants of the dead, and the priests; last of all
followed the sarcophagus on a boat--for the soul of the dead passed
like the sun-god on a boat to the under world. This boat was on rollers,
and drawn by oxen. The procession was closed by the mourners of the
family and the friends. When the bull had been sacrificed and
frankincense burned to the gods, libations were poured in honour of the
dead. He was praised, as Diodorus assures us, not because he was born of
a noble race, but because he had been carefully educated and well
instructed, because he had been pious towards the gods, and had lived a
just and sober life. Then the kinsfolk implored the gods to receive the
dead into the society of the good. The accompanying multitude joined in
the prayer, and extolled the faith of the deceased, who now would for
ever pass his life in the company of the good.[117] The coffin was then
brought into the upper chamber, and from thence, when the ceremonies
were completed, it was carried to its proper resting-place, and placed
on the west side of it; the place was then closed and sealed.

According to the Egyptian story, Osiris was not slain by Typhon. He did
not die; he was only taken away from men, as Diodorus says;[118] he
descended into the under world; he passed away into the invisible
region, while in the visible world he continued to live and work in the
vigorous strength of his son Horus. In the shape of Horus, or Ra, Osiris
wandered through the visible world. He changed only his name and shape
when, every evening, he went back to his distant home in order to be
alone. Thus, by descending from earth and dying, he had received the
sovereignty of the lower world, and left to the youthful Ra, his son
Horus, the empire of this world. As the sun goes down every evening,
and every morning awakes to new life, as the vegetation dies away in
the heat of summer and in autumn, and again in the spring attains to new
life, so to the minds of the Egyptians death, in all its shapes, was
only death in appearance, in reality it was a transition to a new life.
And as Osiris remained alive in death, and was the source of new life,
so through him and in him the soul of man was aroused out of death to a
new life. The sacred animals and men were of divine nature and origin;
they could not, therefore, end with death; death could only carry them
back to their divine origin, to that other world, from which they had
come; and in that other world they must awake to a new life.

Owing to this power of awakening life out of death, Osiris became to the
Egyptians the special god of the human soul. As lord of the under world,
Osiris is often found on the monuments in the shape of a mummy. His
colour was in this case black, like his bull in Memphis; his clothing
was white;[119] his symbol, a wide-open eye, signifying the second
beholding of light. In this form of Osiris the Greeks recognised the
Dionysus of their Mysteries, whom they could also compare with Osiris as
the giver of fruits.[120]

The Egyptians, says Herodotus, were the first to maintain that the soul
of man was immortal.[121] Plutarch, as we have already seen, informs us
that to the Egyptian Osiris was the embodiment not only of all that is
in heaven, but also of all that is in the under world. "His soul," he
continues, "was regarded by the Egyptians as eternal and indestructible,
and, according to the doctrine of the priests, Osiris ruled over the
dead, as Hades and Pluto among the Greeks. In reality, he was free and
untouched by everything subject to change and death. When men are
delivered from the body, and from pain, and pass into the eternal and
invisible world, where pain is unknown, then Osiris becomes their king
and leader. They are his retainers, who desire him, and are spectators
of a beauty inconceivable and inexpressible to men. This is the
explanation of the story most suitable to the deities."[122]

The inscriptions on the sarcophagi, the wraps round the corpses, but
above all a papyrus roll placed in the coffin with the dead body, the
so-called "Book of the Dead," enable us to ascertain with considerable
accuracy the views of the Egyptians on the fate of the soul after death.
The greater part of the known manuscripts of this book belong to the
seventh or sixth century B.C. The contents show that rubrics and prayers
of the same purport, but differently drawn up, proceeding from different
times, and with different commentaries, are collected together in order
to provide the dead person with everything he can want in the next
world. All the prayers and invocations for that world are also given, in
order that the most effective may be at hand, just as at the end of
these manuscripts all the names under which Osiris can be invoked--and
they are more than a hundred--are gathered together. But fragments of
this Book of the Dead, or, more strictly, this Book of the Resurrection,
which forms the core of the Egyptian doctrine of the world to come, are
found hewn in sarcophagi--already with a triple commentary--which belong
to a date previous to the year 2000 B.C.

After death the soul of man descends with the setting sun under the
earth into the nether world. Here, on the day of the "valuation of
words," the day of "justification," the soul is examined, and its
actions weighed in the hall of double justice, _i.e._ the justice which
rewards and the justice which punishes. Osiris, with a crown upon his
head, and holding in his hand a crosier and a whip, sits upon a throne
surrounded by the water of life, out of which spring up lotus-flowers.
Beside him sit forty-two spirits; Anubis, the god with a jackal's head,
the leader and keeper of the dead, and Horus, with a hawk's head, are
busied with a balance; in one scale is the heart of the deceased, in the
other an ostrich-feather, the symbol of truth and justice. The god with
the head of an ibis, the scribe of truth, takes down the result of the
weighing. As Osiris, according to the legend, was once justified by
Horus and Thoth, so is every human soul justified by those deities. The
deceased assures them that he has committed no sins; he enumerates
forty-two errors into which he has not fallen. He has done no
wickedness; he has not stolen, nor slain any one intentionally; he has
not allowed his devotions to be seen; he has not been guilty of
hypocrisy, or lying; he has not stolen the property of the gods, or the
sacrificial food; he has not calumniated any one, or fallen into
drunkenness or adultery; he has not turned away his ear from the words
of truth; he has been no idle talker; he has not slighted the king or
his father; he has not contemned the gods, or torn from the dead their
linen wraps.

The departed spirit was not allowed to enter the other world in
ignorance: he must know what awaits him there; the path which he has to
tread, and the prayers which opened for him the gates of the various
regions, which gave him power to overcome whatever spirits and monsters
might meet him in the way and attempt to hold him back; he must know
the charm which will at last unlock for him the fields of Ra. He must
know and recognise the gods to whom he returns; the nature from which he
has sprung, and which he now again assumes. As in him divinity has been
made human, so is he now in turn deified. To secure this knowledge for
the dead, the book is placed in his coffin, the important passages were
written on the wraps, and engraved on the coffin.

If the heart of the dead man was not found too light and his soul was
pure,[123] he was acquitted in the other world, he received back from
the gods his heart and members renewed and deified, and the goddesses of
life and the sky--Hathor and Nut--poured out upon him the water of life.
His prayer opened for him the gates of the dwellings in the world to
come; he was enabled to strike with his lance the evil spirits and
monsters, the crocodiles, snakes, tortoises, the two vipers, and the
serpent Apep, to keep at a distance all impurity, and finally to reach
the fields of the sun-god.[124] Here the blessed planted the heavenly
wheat--of which the ears were two cubits in length--wandered at will in
shady avenues with odours in their hair, and bathed in pools of water.

Arrived among the gods, the soul receives the power of assuming various
existences--that is, apparently, of entering into the bodies of men and
beasts, and returning finally into the divine substance from which it
sprang. Hence to the Egyptians death is the "going up to heaven," the
"entrance into heaven," the "entrance into the place of the gods."[125]
The first chapter of the Book of the Dead was to be pronounced by the
deceased on the day of his burial when going forth from the grave at the
western gate of the under-world, in order to find immediate entrance
there. "By learning this chapter when on earth," so runs the close of it
in the book, "or by setting it forth in writing on his tomb, he will
emerge on the day, and on entering into his dwelling he will not be
thrust back. Food and drink will be given to him, much flesh also on the
table of Ra; he will work in the fields on the plain of Aanro
(Paradise), where corn and wheat will be given to him; he will live
happily as he lived upon earth." On the day of justification, the dead
has to say: "I am one of the initiated; thy name I know; I know the
names of thy forty-two gods, who dwell with thee in the hall of twofold
justice." Then comes the answer: "Enter! thou knowest us."[126] On a
sarcophagus of the time of the Amenemha and Sesurtesen the deceased
utters the following words, which are found detailed at greater length
and commented upon in the seventeenth chapter of the Book of the Dead.
"I am Tum (p. 51), a being, which I alone am. I am Ra in his first
sovereignty. I am the great self-existing god, the creator of his name,
the ruler of all gods, whom none of the gods restrains. I was yesterday;
I know the morrow. When I spoke a battle-field was prepared for the
gods. I know the name of that great god who is there. Glory of Ra is his
name. I am the great Bennu which is worshipped in On. I am Chem in his
manifestation; on me have been placed the two feathers on my head; I
have arrived at my land, I have arrived at my dwelling-place."[127] "The
sun-mountain (horizon) of his father Tum is meant,"--so run the
commentaries, both old and late, and at the same time they remark that
the great god, existing by his own power, is Osiris; and the great Bennu
also is Osiris (p. 69). By Chem is meant Chemhor, _i.e._, the Horus, who
by his own power renews his own youth every day. On the cover of the
sarcophagus we find the formula, "When this chapter has been pronounced,
he (the dead man) enters into the western land at the time of his
resurrection: if entirely unacquainted with it, he cannot enter; for
him, as for one uninitiated, there is no resurrection."[128]

Thus we must assume that the Egyptians believed in man's return to his
divine origin in the sense that a soul which was not found wanting in
weight, and was conscious of its own true nature, was not only received,
after the completion of the proper cycle, into the bosom of the godhead,
and allowed to be absorbed into the divine power, but was so far deified
that it could adopt divine attributes and power, and even assume a
divine title.

According to the account of Herodotus, the Egyptians believed that the
soul of the dead passed into an animal, born at the time; from this it
wandered into all the other animals on earth, in the air and the sea,
and after 3,000 years it was again born with a human body.[129] That
this account is incorrect is proved by the records already quoted; it
may perhaps have arisen from the Egyptian conception that the soul of
the justified obtained the power to assume every shape. But a
purification of the unclean and ignorant soul by passing through the
bodies of all kinds of animals could never have been assumed by the
Egyptians, since the sacred races were pre-eminent manifestations, and
the selected animals continuous incarnations, of the gods. If a
pilgrimage through the bodies of beasts was really regarded by the
Egyptians as a course of punishment and amelioration, the beasts meant
can only be such as were not sacred. But as yet the examination of the
monuments and records has by no means completely cleared up the relation
of the soul to the body it has left, nor has it attained to any result
on the fate in store for the souls which were found wanting when weighed
in the balance.

FOOTNOTES:

[34] Herod. 3, 37.

[35] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1860, 1, 357.

[36] "De Isid." c. 51, 52; "De Pyth. Oraculis," p. 400.

[37] Macrob. "Sat." 6, 18.

[38] "De Isid." c. 36.

[39] De Rougé, "Zeitsch. d. d. m. Gesellschaft," after a sepulchral
pillar in the Berlin Museum, 4, 375.

[40] Champollion, Monuments, pl. 123 _seq._ Dümichen,
"Tempelinschriften." 1, 24. Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte des Todtenbuchs,"
s. 13.

[41] Lepsius, "Die Götter der vier Elemente;" Dümichen, in "Zeitsch. für
ægyptische Sprache," 1869 s. 7.

[42] Herod. 2, 61.

[43] Plut. "De Isid." c. 38.

[44] The identification of Neith with Athene (Herod. 2, 62; Plat. "Tim."
p. 21) rests on the similarity of the name, on the torch-races in honour
of Pallas at Athens, and the feast of lamps at Sais. Gutschmid,
"Beiträge zur Geschichte des alten Orients," s. 39, 45 ff., has shown
that Neith and Athene cannot be brought into agreement in points of
language. The inscription on the throne of Neith at Sais, given by
Plutarch ("De Isid." c. 9), "I am all that has been, is, will be, and no
mortal has lifted my robe," does not in the first part of it contradict
certain applications of the oldest text of the "Book of the Dead" (see
below). On the other hand, the second part is doubtful. In any case, the
fact that the _peplos_ has not been raised does not refer to the
inconceivable nature of the goddess, but to seclusion from sexual
intercourse. It can only mean that Neith was born from her own creative
force.

[45] Herod. 2, 60, 137, 138.

[46] Horapoll. 1, 10.

[47] Brugsch, "Zeitschr. d. d. morgenland. Gesellschaft," 10, 683.

[48] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1860, 1, 339.

[49] Plutarch, "De Isid." c. 63; cf. Eber's "Gosen," s. 484.

[50] Plut. "De Isid." c. 9.

[51] Bunsen, "Ægypten," I, 446.

[52] Lepsius in "Zeitschrift für æg. Sprache," 1868, s. 127.

[53] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 42, 48, 52; "Götterkreis," s. 31-43.

[54] Plut. "De Isid." c. 11.

[55] Ibid. c. 21.

[56] Wilkinson, 4, 237, 242, 246.

[57] Parthey, "Abh. der Berl. Akademie," 1863; Minutoli, "Reise zum
Tempel des Ammon;" cf. Herod. 4. 181.

[58] Bunsen, "Ægypten," 1, 470; Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 105.

[59] Diod. 1, 13.

[60] Plut. "De Isid." c. 12-20.

[61] Herod. 2, 144; Diod. 1, 25, 44.

[62] Compare the beautiful explanation given by Lepsius of the game at
dice between Hermes and Selene, narrated in Plutarch, _loc. cit._

[63] Lepsius, "Chronol." 1, 91. As to the meaning of Seb, I should be
inclined to give the preference to the view of Brugsch.

[64] Brugsch and Lepsius in "Zeitschrift für æg. Sprache," 1868, s. 122
ff.

[65] Wilkinson, "Ancient Egypt," 4, 189.

[66] Lepsius, "Götterkreis," s. 35; "Briefe," 106-111.

[67] Diod. 1, 22.

[68] Plut. "De Isid." c. 20

[69] Plut. _ib._ 12-20; Strab. p. 803.

[70] Herod. 2, 59; Plut. _loc. cit._ 21; Diod. 1, 88.

[71] Busiris was the name of several towns in Lower Egypt; we must
assume that the chief town of the district of this name was the scene of
the festival. How the Greeks turned the name of this town into a king
Busiris who used to slay strangers, I cannot explain. Eratosthenes in
Strabo, p. 802, says: "There never was a king Busiris; the story may
have been invented owing to the inhospitality of the inhabitants of
Busiris;" and Diodorus observes: "It was not a king who was called
Busiris, but the grave of Osiris was so named in the native language"
(1, 88), which is near the truth.

[72] Herod. 2, 40, 42, 144.

[73] Plut. "De Isid." c. 35, 39.

[74] Plut. _loc. cit._ 12, 21, 42.

[75] Plut. _loc. cit._ c. 52. The inscriptions on the temple at Dendera
prescribe a seven days' lamentation for Osiris, beginning on the 24th
Choiak, and give full directions for the burial. Lauth, in the
"Zeitschr. f. æg. Sprache," 1866, s. 64 ff.

[76] Herod. 2, 41, 132.

[77] "De Isid." c. 42.

[78] Diod. 1, 88.

[79] Plutarch, _loc. cit._ c. 12.

[80] Lepsius, "Götterkreis," s. 53.

[81] Plut. _loc. cit._ c. 32, 40, 50.

[82] Plut. _loc. cit._ c. 65.

[83] Parthey, on Plut. "De Isid." c. 12.

[84] Plut. _loc. cit._ 50.

[85] Wilkinson, _loc. cit._ 4, 436.

[86] Brugsch in the "Zeitschr. d. d. m. Gesellschaft," 9, 10, 68 c. ff.

[87] Plut. "De Isid." c. 33, 39, 40, 49, 53, 65, 71.

[88] Plut. "De Isid." c. 64.

[89] Diod. 1, 27; Plut. "De Isid." c. 9, 56, 63.

[90] Plut. _loc. cit._ c. 61.

[91] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 46.

[92] Birch. "Gall." 1, 24, 44.

[93] Herod. 2, 66.

[94] Diod. 1, 83, 84.

[95] Plut. "De Isid." c. 43.

[96] Herod. 3, 28; Ælian ("De Nat. Anim." 1, 10) speaks of twenty-nine
marks of Apis; cf Plin. "Hist. Nat." 8, 184.

[97] Diod. 1, 84, 85.

[98] Diod. 1, 85; Plut. "De Iside." c. 29; Strabo, p. 807.

[99] "Mém. pres. à l'Acad. des Inscript." sér. 1, 2, p. 15.

[100] Mariette, "Bulletin de l'Athén-Français," Oct. 1856, p. 75; Juill.
Nov. 1855, pp. 67, 96, 98.

[101] "Ardea purpurea;" Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 50.

[102] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 43, 46, 51.

[103] Brugsch in "Zeitschr. d. d. m. G." 10, 651 ff.

[104] Herod. 2, 73.

[105] Plin. "Hist. Nat." 10, 2; cf. 13, 9; Pompon. Mela. 3, 8.

[106] "Annal." 6, 28.

[107] "De Nat. Anim." 6, 58.

[108] "Hist. Nat." 10, 5.

[109] Ibid. 1, 34, 35.

[110] Brugsch, "Zeitschr. d. d. m. G." 10, 651 ff.; Lepsius, "Aelteste
Texte," s. 51; De Rougé, "Bulletin de l'Athén. Français," 1856, p. 25
_seqq._

[111] Brugsch, "Zeitschr. d. d. m. G." 10, 683.

[112] Herod. 2, 69.

[113] Strabo, p. 811.

[114] Herod. 2, 65-67.

[115] Wilkinson, "Egypt," 5. 117, 123, 230 ff.

[116] Diod. 1, 51, cf. 92.

[117] Diod. 1, 92; Wilkinson, "Egypt," sec. ser. 2, 411.

[118] Diod. 1, 25.

[119] Plut. "De Iside," c. 33, 78.

[120] Herod. 2, 42; Diod. 1, 11, 13, 25.

[121] Ibid. 2, 123.

[122] "De Iside," c. 54, 61, 79, 80.

[123] Pierret, "Traduct. du Chap. I. du Livre des Morts;" "Zeitsch. für
æg. Sprache," 1869, s. 135; 1870, s. 18 ff.

[124] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1860, p. 79 ff.

[125] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 4.

[126] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 6, 9.

[127] Lepsius, _loc. cit._ s. 30 ff.

[128] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 25.

[129] Herod. 2, 123.




CHAPTER IV.

THE KINGDOM OF MEMPHIS.


The lists of the Egyptians place Menes (Mena) at the head of their
series of kings. They describe him as a native of This, a place in the
neighbourhood of Abydus, below Thebes, a district which Diodorus
considers the oldest part of Egypt. Menes passes for the founder of the
kingdom and the builder of Memphis (Mennefer); he is said to have taught
the Egyptians the worship of the gods and the offering of
sacrifice.[130] Herodotus informs us that he learnt from the Egyptian
priests that Menes had thrown a dam across the Nile about 100 stades
above Memphis, and thus forced the stream which previously flowed at the
foot of the Libyan chain of hills to leave its ancient channel, and flow
at an equal distance between the two ranges. When the land thus gained
by the dam had become firm, he built upon it the city, now called
Memphis, and still situated in the narrow part of Egypt. Towards the
north and west sides of the city, Menes had excavated a lake, and filled
it with water from the river--which was itself a protection to the city
on the east,--and in the city he built the greatest and most remarkable
temple of Hephæstus (Ptah).[131] Diodorus observes:--The founder of
Memphis, the most splendid city in Egypt, selected the most suitable
site by founding the city in the place where the Nile separates into
several arms, so that the city, lying on the pass, commanded the
navigation up the Nile. He also obtained for the place a wonderful
advantage and security by throwing a huge dam in front of it towards the
south, as the Nile at the time of inundation overflows the district.
This dam was a protection against the rising water, and at the same time
served as an acropolis and defence from the attack of enemies. On all
the other sides of the city he caused a large and deep lake to be
excavated, which received the overflow of the water and afforded the
strongest protection for the city. The circuit of the city he placed at
150 stades, and owing to the excellence of the situation, Memphis was
generally chosen by the kings as their place of residence.[132] The
situation, just a little above the place where the river-valley,
hitherto enclosed between the two ranges of hills, opens out into the
Delta, was certainly the best adapted to form the centre of an empire
extending over the narrow valley of the upper river and the broader
district of the Delta, with its wealth of corn-land and meadows, and to
check the entrance of enemies who came from the north-west or the
north-east into the upper valley, even when it was no longer possible to
maintain the Delta against them. About fifteen miles above Memphis, at
Kafr-el-Yat, the Nile makes a considerable bend to the east, and modern
investigations claim to have discovered traces showing that this curve
is due to the hand of man.

Menes, whose accession, according to the arrangement of Lepsius, would
fall in the year 3892 B.C., was followed on the throne by King Athotis
(Ateta), who was said to have built the citadel at Memphis. Next came
Kenkenes, whose successor was Uenephes, to whom is ascribed the erection
of the pyramids. We have seen what care and labour the Egyptians devoted
to their tombs, their "everlasting houses." The west, where the sun
sets, and the desert spreads out in boundless expanse beyond the Libyan
range, belonged in their minds to the gods of night, of the under-world,
and of death. About ten miles to the west of Memphis there rises a
desolate and barren plateau of rock, which for many miles runs parallel
to the river, about 100 feet above the blooming and animated valley
through which the Nile takes its course. In that rocky soil, which
separates the fruitful land from the desert, the bodies of the dead were
placed in chambers, either hewn in the solid stone, or, where the soil
was less firm, built of masonry, and thus secured even from the overflow
of the river. Even the kings sought their resting-places on this plateau
of rock. They, above all, gave attention to the solidity and durability
of their tombs; and in death, as in life, they wished to be kings. The
place where a king rested must be marked as royal, and visible from a
distance; the grave of a king must tower over the rest; his chamber must
be of all most difficult to open. Thus at first blocks of stone were
rolled upon the closed burial-place of a king, or a mound of earth was
raised over it, if sand and soil were to be obtained in the
neighbourhood. The strong winds which blew from the desert made it,
however, necessary to secure these mounds, and cover them with stone.
Hence by degrees the sepulchral heaps acquired a definite shape: they
were rectangular structures, lessening toward the apex; then, by
extending the base and sharpening the gradient, they were brought into
the form of pyramids, and thus obtained the greatest possible firmness
and solidity. For a similar reason the core, or central part, was no
longer made of earth, but of brick; where blocks of stone could be
obtained they were fitted into the core with more and more regularity,
until at last these structures were completed within and without of
rectangular hewn blocks of stone in regular layers, and artificial
mountains of stone towered over the sepulchral chambers of the kings.

"At a distance of forty stades from Memphis," Strabo tells us, "is a
range of hills, on which stand the pyramids, or sepulchres of the kings.
Among these, three are especially deserving of notice. Rectangular in
shape, they are about one stadium high; and the height is slightly less
than the length of either side. The sides are not equal, one is a little
longer than the other, and near the middle of the longer side is a
stone, which can be taken out. Behind this a winding, hollow passage
leads to the tomb. Two of these pyramids stand close to each other on
the same level; at a distance, on a higher level, rises the third,
which, though much smaller, has been erected at much greater cost."
"Like mountains," says Tacitus, "the pyramids have been raised amid
impassable quicksands by the emulation and power of the kings."[133]

About seventy of these structures, which rise in a long line on the
plateau of Memphis, from Abu Roash to Dahshur,[134] remain as witnesses
of the rulers of the old kingdom of Memphis and their dependants, of the
artistic skill and laborious industry of their nation. Of some only the
bases and a few fragments are in existence; of the largest, the points,
and at least a part of the casing, are either decayed, fallen down, or
broken off; for at a later time the Arabs used these monuments as
quarries. Three pyramids which stand in the neighbourhood of the modern
Abusir are formed of rough blocks of stone, both in the cores and in the
passages to the sepulchral chambers; and these blocks are fastened
together by mud from the Nile poured in between them; their casings, now
decayed, were of lime-stone blocks, and in height they extended from 150
to 200 feet. Others, originally at least, of an equal height, of which
the core was regularly built of brick, are found farther to the south
near Dahshur. The architecture of these remains shows that the kings of
Memphis commenced building their tombs soon after their accession. They
began, it would seem, with a core of moderate size, and in this they
probably constructed a sort of temporary chamber. If time sufficed, the
first plan was overlaid with new strata, and thus it gradually increased
in size. Should the builder die before the whole was completed, the
casing of the structure thus raised in the form of steps was left to the
successor.[135] Between seven smaller pyramids, built regularly of stone
blocks, which are about 150 feet in height, and of similar plan and
structure, rise the three largest at Gizeh; the highest was originally
480 feet in height, though now it measures only 450 feet; the next
greatest, standing south-west of the highest, is now 447 feet, and was
originally 457 feet in height; the third measures but 218 feet. The
second largest, originally twenty-three feet lower than the largest, is
on a slightly higher level, the masonry is inferior to the largest, and
the chamber lies immediately under the area of the structure. The
largest measures 716 feet, or 500 Egyptian cubits,[136] on each side of
the area; the height along the slope is 574 feet, and the structure
contains about ninety million cubic feet of masonry. Fifty feet above
the original area, now covered with the sand of the desert, in the
middle of the north side, there commences a gradually descending
passage, about three feet broad and four feet high, leading to a chamber
hewn deep in the foundation rock. This chamber lies more than one
hundred feet below the level of the pyramid, exactly 600 feet under the
apex, and in a perpendicular line with it; it is thirty-six feet above
the level of the Nile. From this passage to the chamber there branches
off, just behind the entrance, a horizontal shaft, and from this rises
an ascending passage leading to two chambers, one over the other, which,
like the sepulchral chamber below, lie in the axis of the pyramid. The
third and smaller pyramid--its sides measure 333 feet, and the height of
the slope is 262 feet--being built upon looser soil, required a greater
substructure, on which it rose in five or six perpendicular and
gradually diminishing stories, the spaces between being filled up with
bevelled masonry. Up to a considerable height the casing consists of
polished slabs of granite. Under this structure in the native rock lies
a larger chamber, and behind this the sepulchral chamber.

When Herodotus visited Egypt about the middle of the fifth century B.C.,
and questioned his interpreter and guide about the builders of these
three pyramids, he was told in answer that they were built by Cheops,
Chephren, and Mycerinus. He was told that Cheops first caused a road to
be made from the stone quarries in the Arabian chain of hills--the range
east of the Nile--down to the river, and again from the west side of the
river to the high ground above Memphis. The road was built of smoothed
stones five stades in length, ten fathoms broad, and at the highest
places thirty-two fathoms high; and it was intended to convey the
materials from the Arabian side of the river. In making this road and
building the subterranean chamber for the grave of Cheops ten years were
consumed, although 100,000 men were constantly employed upon it by
spaces of three months, when they were relieved by an equal number of
fresh workmen. Twenty years were then spent upon the pyramid, of which
each side and the height measured 800 feet; it was built in such a
manner that the structure was carried out by landings and steps, like a
staircase. When the proper height was reached, the landings were covered
from top to bottom with smoothed and carefully-fitted stones, and no
stone is less than thirty feet. Under the surface was a canal carried in
masonry from the Nile round the subterranean chamber. "It is also
inscribed on the pyramid," Herodotus continues, "what the workmen
consumed in radishes, onions, and garlic, and on these, as I well
remember, the interpreter who read the letters told me, 1,600 talents of
silver were spent. If this is true, what must have been expended upon
iron for the tools, and on food and clothing for the workmen?" When
Cheops had reigned fifty years he was succeeded by his brother Chephren,
who also built a pyramid, though not equal in size to the other, and
without any chamber or subterranean canal. "Both pyramids stand on the
same elevation, of about one hundred feet; but the second is forty feet
lower than the first; the lower stratum is built of vari-coloured
Ethiopian stone." When Chephren had reigned fifty-six years, he was
followed by Mycerinus, the son of Cheops. This king also left a pyramid
behind him, "but his pyramid was much smaller than that built by his
father: the sides are only 280 feet in length; the lower half is built
of Ethiopian stone."[137]

The account of Diodorus is as follows:--King Chemmis of Memphis reigned
fifty years, and built the largest of the three pyramids, which in
height measures more than six plethra, and along the sides more than
seven plethra. It is entirely constructed of solid stone, very difficult
to work, and therefore of endless durability. Even now, although not
less than a thousand, or as some say even more than 3,400, years have
passed, the structure is uninjured, and the joints of the stones
unloosened. Besides, we are told that these stones were brought from a
considerable distance out of Arabia, and the structure was carried to
its present height by means of mounds of earth. Most wonderful of all,
no traces of these mounds, no fragments from the hewing and smoothing of
the stones remain; so that it would seem that this work was not
accomplished gradually by the hand of man, but was planted complete by a
god in the midst of the surrounding sand. Though it is said that 360,000
men bestowed their labour on the structure, the work can hardly have
been finished in twenty years, and the number of men who erected it must
also have removed the mounds of earth and excavated material, and put
everything in its original condition. Chemmis was followed by his
brother Kephren, who reigned fifty-six years. Other accounts tell us
that the kingdom descended on his son, Chabryes, and not on his
brother. But all agree that he built the second pyramid, which resembles
the first in the art of the execution, though much inferior in size,
since on the sides it measures only one stadium (or, according to recent
measurement, exactly 700-1/2 Greek feet). And while the money spent in
radishes and garden herbs for the builders is inscribed on the larger
one, the smaller remains without any inscription. Though both these
kings had destined these tombs for their place of burial, neither is
buried there. Roused by the burden of their labours, the cruelty and
violence of these kings--and in Herodotus also Cheops and Chephren
appear as wicked and godless kings--the people threatened to take their
bodies out of their graves and insult them. Terrified by this threat,
each of the kings in his last moments bade his relations bury him
privately in a secret place. After Kephren reigned Mycerinus, whom
others call Mencherinus, the son of Chemmis. He built the smallest
pyramid. Though less in size, it surpasses the others in the excellence
of the work and the beauty of the stone; up to the fifteenth layer it
consists of black stone resembling the stone of Thebes; from thence to
the top the stone is the same as in the other pyramids. On the north
side is written the name of the builder, Mycerinus. Abhorring the
cruelty of his predecessors, Mycerinus, as we learn, sought to make his
rule moderate and beneficent to his subjects, and did everything to gain
the affections of the nation. He paid great attention to the
administration of justice; and to the common people who had not received
from the tribunals such a sentence as seemed just to him, he made
presents. "But as to the building of the pyramids, there is no agreement
either among the Egyptians or their historians; some ascribe them to
the kings I have mentioned; some to other kings."[138]

The accounts given by Herodotus and Diodorus of the structure of the
largest pyramid are completely confirmed by modern researches. Even now
it is thought that traces can be recognised of the causeway which served
for the transport of the materials from the left bank of the Nile to the
plateau.[139] The pyramid itself is built in large regular steps
constructed of squares of granite. The yellow lime-stone of the casing
must also have been really brought from the Arabian side of the Nile,
because better stone of that kind was found there.[140] On the other
hand, the account of a subterranean canal round the grave chamber is
merely a legend of the people, who desired to adorn with new marvels the
structure already so marvellous; it is impossible, simply because the
lower chamber, and not only the area of the pyramid, is above the lower
level of the Nile. The 100,000 workmen of Herodotus, changed every three
months, and the 360,000 of Diodorus--a number formed from the days in
the old Egyptian year--have arisen out of the free invention of later
times, although the building must certainly have occupied more than a
decade of years. Inscriptions are not found now on the external side of
the pyramid. If such were in existence at the time of Herodotus, they
certainly contained other things than those which the interpreter
pretended to read there. The interpreters who served as guides to the
travellers of that day in Egypt, as the dragoman does now, could hardly
have read the hieroglyphics; they contented themselves with narrating
the traditions and stories popularly connected with the great monuments
of past time, not without certain exaggerations and additions.[141]

But the names of the builders of the three largest pyramids, which these
interpreters mentioned to the Greeks, are confirmed by the monuments. In
the deep chamber of the largest pyramid there is no sarcophagus; in the
upper of the two chambers which lie in the axis of the pyramid there has
been found, it is true, a simple sarcophagus of red granite, but it
bears no inscription. Above these chambers, however, there are certain
small spaces left open, with a view no doubt of diminishing the pressure
of the stone-work upon them, and on the walls of these spaces is written
the name, Chufu, Chnemu Chufu, in hieratic characters.[142] The same
name frequently recurs in the tombs surrounding this pyramid, in which,
according to the inscriptions, the wives, sons, officers, and priests of
Chufu were buried; and among them the scribe of the buildings of the
kings and the priest of Apis, who was at the same time keeper of the
gates and of the palace. In this inscription the pyramid of Chufu is
called "Chut." On a monumental stone found in the Apis tombs--now in
Cairo--we read, "The living Horus, the King of Egypt, Chufu, has built a
temple to Isis near the temple of the Sphinx, north of the temple of
Osiris, and has erected his pyramid beside the temple of Isis."[143]
Chufu himself is not found in Egypt, but in the peninsula of Sinai he is
pictured in relief on the rocks in the Wadi Maghara. He is represented
as lifting his war-club against an enemy whom he has forced upon his
knee and seized by the head-dress with the left hand.[144] In an
inscription in the same valley, the oldest which we possess, his
predecessor Snefru claims to have subjugated these regions.

In the second pyramid, in the chamber under the surface, a sarcophagus
of granite has been discovered on the floor without any inscription. But
in the inscriptions on the graves, especially on the grave of the
architect of King Chafra, his pyramid is mentioned as "the great
pyramid." Between the paws of the Sphinx which stands to the north of
the second pyramid, hewn out of the living rock, is a monumental stone,
on which is read the name Chafra,[145] and in the ruins of a temple
lying near the Sphinx--the same without doubt which is mentioned in the
stone at Cairo--seven statues have been exhumed, the inscriptions on
which prove that they represent "the Master and Gold Horus, Chafra, the
good god, the lord of the crown," _i.e._, King Chafra himself.[146] And
lastly, the inscriptions on the tomb of a woman whose name is read as
Mertitef, prove that she was the chief favourite of Snefru and of Chufu,
and had been united to Chafra.[147] Hence Chafra must have succeeded
Chufu, and the "great" pyramid built by him can hardly have been any
other than that which now holds the second place.

In the sepulchral chamber of the third pyramid, it is known in the
inscriptions as "Har," _i.e._, "the supreme," the sarcophagus of King
Menkera with his mummy has been discovered. It is made of blue basalt,
and bears the following inscription:--"O Osiris, King Menkera, ever
living one; begotten of the sky, carried in the bosom of Nut, scion of
Seb (p. 55). Thy mother Nut is outstretched over thee, in her name of
the mystery of the sky may she deify thee and destroy thy enemies, King
Menkera, ever living one."[148]

It is therefore an ascertained fact that Chufu, Chafra, and Menkera were
the builders of the three great pyramids. In the mouth of the Greeks the
name Chufu passed into Cheops, and by a farther change into Suphis. The
name Chemmis in Diodorus has arisen out of the name Chnemu in the form
Chnemu Chufu; from Chafra naturally arose Chephren, Kephren, and
Chabryes. In the list of kings in Eratosthenes, the fourteenth successor
of Menes is Saophis; Eratosthenes allows him a reign of twenty-nine
years. His successor, who has a reign of twenty-seven years, bears the
same name. The second Saophis is followed by Moscheres with a reign of
thirty-one years. Manetho's list gives the name Suphis to the
twenty-seventh king after Menes, and he is said to have reigned
sixty-three years. Then follows a second Suphis, with a reign of
sixty-six years, and this king is succeeded by Menchres, who reigned
sixty-three years. On the first Suphis in Manetho's list the excerpt of
Africanus remarks: "This king built the largest pyramid, which Herodotus
assigns to the time of Cheops;" in the excerpt of Eusebius, both in the
Greek text and the Armenian translation, this remark is made on the
second Suphis. Hence we can have no hesitation in identifying the Cheops
and Chephren of Herodotus, the Chemmis and Kephren of Diodorus, with the
first and second Saophis and Sufis of the lists, the Chufu and Chafra
of the inscriptions; and the Mycerinus of Herodotus and Diodorus is
beyond doubt the same as the Moscheres of Eratosthenes, the Mencheres of
Manetho, and the Menkera of the sarcophagus in the third pyramid. In the
national tradition of the Egyptians, as received by the Greeks, Cheops
and Chephren were called brothers, and this is no doubt mainly due to
the fact that the monuments of these two kings surpassed all the other
pyramids, and were of nearly the same height and size. It is impossible
that Cheops should have reigned fifty years, and his brother Chephren
who succeeded him, fifty-six years, as Herodotus and Diodorus tell
us--the inscription quoted above makes the same woman the favourite of
the predecessor of Chufu, of Chufu, and Chafra also; even more
impossible is it that the first Suphis should have reigned sixty-three
years, and the second sixty-six, as given in the list of Manetho, if
they were brothers; or that Mycerinus, whom Herodotus as well as
Diodorus calls the son of Cheops, should have succeeded Chephren with a
reign of sixty-three years, as Manetho tells us. Like their brotherhood,
the wickedness of Cheops and Chephren is due to the popular legends of
later times. The sight of the enormous structures forced on later
generations the reflection what labour, what stupendous efforts must
have been necessary for their erection. This reflection united with
certain dim memories, and gathered round the rule of the strangers, the
shepherd-tribes, which for a long time afflicted Egypt, as is clear
enough from a trait in the narrative of Herodotus. He assures us that
the Egyptians could scarcely be induced to mention the names of the
kings who built the great pyramids: they spoke of them as the works of
the shepherd Philitis.[149] In the eyes of the Egyptians of the olden
time, tombs would never have appeared to be works of impiety and
wickedness, realising as they did in such an extraordinary degree the
object most eagerly desired, a secure and indestructible resting-place
for the dead: with them they would rather pass as works of singular
piety. Without doubt it is the older tradition, that of the priests,
which meets us in the observation appended in the list of Manetho and
the excerpt of Africanus to the first Suphis, and in the excerpt of
Eusebius, both in the Greek text and Armenian translation, to the second
Suphis, in which we are told that this king had composed a sacred book,
and the Egyptians regarded it as a very great treasure.

According to the inscription, Chufu had erected a temple to Isis by the
side of the temple of the Sphinx, and therefore the latter temple must
have been already in existence. And as a fact the ruins still found
beside the great Sphinx give evidence of very ancient workmanship. There
was a court, the ante-court of the temple, which surrounded a portico
supported on twelve square pillars; next came a hall supported on
monoliths, the temple itself, and finally the Holy of Holies, surrounded
by small chambers. The material used in building was limestone and
granite. The symbolic form of the deity, to whom the temple belonged,
was the enormous Sphinx, 190 feet in length, hewn out of the rock, with
the body of a lion and the head of a man. From the memorial stone before
it we learn that it symbolized the god Harmachu (Armachis of the
Greeks), _i.e._ Horus in Splendour (_har-em-chu_).[150] From the
inscription on this stone, which dates from the time of Tuthmosis IV.,
it seems to follow that it was Chafra, who caused this shape to be hewn
out of the rock and consecrated it to the god. Other inscriptions inform
us that the pyramids were regarded as sepulchral temples, and that there
were priests for the service of the princes who were buried there, and
had attained to a divine nature, and these services were still in
existence at the time of the Ptolemies. One of the tombs at Gizeh
belongs to a priest, a relation of Chafra, whose duty it was to "honour
the pyramid Uer (the Great) of king Chafra;" another is found at
Sakkarah belonging to "a priest of Chufu, and Chafra."[151] On a
monumental stone of the time of the Ptolemies (found in the Serapeum,
and now in the Louvre) mention is made of the temple of Harmachu on the
south of the house of Isis, and of a certain Psamtik, the prophet of
Isis, of Osarhapi (p. 67), of Harmachu, of Chufu and Chafra.[152]

The temples of Osiris and Isis, near the three great pyramids, and the
inscription on the sarcophagus of king Menkera are evidence that the
cultus of Osiris, the belief in his rule in the next world, in the
return of the soul to her divine origin, and her deification after
death, was already in existence at the time when these monuments were
erected. The use not of hieroglyphics only, but also of the hieratic
alphabet, in red and black colours, in the pyramid of Chufu, and the
graves around it, in the sculptures of which writing materials and rolls
of papyrus are frequently engraved, the forms of domestic and household
life, of agriculture and the cultivation of the vine, of hunting and
fishing, preserved on the tombs of Gizeh, are evidence of the long
existence and manifold development of civilisation, no less than those
great monuments, or even the graves themselves with their artistic mode
of construction, their severe and simple style of execution, and the
pleasing forms of their ornaments. Of the seven statues of Chafra,
discovered in the temple of the Sphinx, one, chiselled out of hard green
and yellow basalt, has been preserved uninjured. The king is represented
sitting, and naked, with the exception of a covering on the head and a
girdle round the loins. The lower arms rest on the thighs, the left hand
is outstretched, the right holds a fillet. The sides of the cube, on
which Chafra is seated, are formed by lions, between the feet of which
are stems of papyrus. On the high back of the chair, behind the head of
the king, sits the hawk of Horus, whose wings are spread forwards in an
attitude of protection. The execution of the statue of the king is a
proof of long practice in sculpture. The natural form is truly and
accurately rendered, and though even here Egyptian art displays its
characteristic inclination to severity, and correctness in the
proportions of the body, to repose and dignity, yet in the head there is
an unmistakable attempt to individualize an outline already fixed--an
attempt not without success. Still more distinctly individual are two
statues found near the pyramids of Meidum, from the reign of the
predecessor of Chufu, a wooden statue, and certain pictures in relief
from the tombs near the great pyramids. The architecture, no less than
the sculpture, of these most ancient monuments, displays a high degree
of experience and a knowledge of the principles of art, a conscious
purpose and effort existing together with a fixed obedience to rule.

We learnt from Diodorus that the great pyramids were erected 1,000, or,
according to some, 3,400 years before his time. According to the list
of Manetho, Cheops, Chephren, and Mycerinus belonged to the fourth
dynasty. If we accept the incredible reigns of sixty-three, sixty-six,
and again, sixty-three years, which Manetho allows to those three kings,
they reigned over Egypt, according to Lepsius' dates, from the year 3095
B.C., to 2903 B.C.

At a period subsequent to these kings the list of Manetho speaks in the
sixth dynasty of a king Phiops, who came to the throne as a child in his
sixth year, and lived to be 100 years old. The list of Erastosthenes
mentions a king Apappus, who reigned for 100 years. The monuments show
us a king Pepi, in whom we recognise Phiops and Apappus, and in
consequence a reign of ninety-five years is assigned to him (2654-2559
B.C.). Yet hitherto the sixteenth year is the highest found on the
monuments for the reign of Pepi; and in the inscription on a tomb at
Abydus, now in the museum at Cairo, a man of the name of Una declares
that he had filled the highest offices in the kingdom under Teta, the
predecessor of Pepi, under Pepi, and again under his successor, Merenra.
If one person could be the minister of three successive rulers, it is
clear that the second of these reigns could not have lasted 95 or 100
years. Under the reign of Pepi, as well as his immediate predecessors
and successors, _i.e._, in the sixth dynasty of Manetho, the development
of Egypt must have undergone a certain change. The kings, previous to
this family, are represented on the monuments with a cap falling to one
side, or with a tall head-dress; Pepi is represented on one relief with
this head-dress, but on another with one of a lower shape. The tall
white cap is the crown of Upper Egypt, the lower red one is the crown
of Lower Egypt. It is no longer on the plateau of Memphis, and among the
tombs there, but in Middle Egypt, near El Kab, and in the valley of
Hamamat, which leads from Coptus to the Red Sea, that we find the
monuments of Pepi and his race, and the tombs of their priests and
magistrates are at Abydus. Under this dynasty, therefore, the central
point of the kingdom appears to have been moved from Memphis in the
direction of Middle Egypt. On the west coast of the peninsula of Sinai,
in the Wadi Maghara, Pepi is seen striking down an enemy; and from the
inscription on the tomb of Una, it is clear that Pepi's kingdom extended
up the Nile as far as the negroes, that his successor caused dockyards
to be built in Nubia, and that Una had to procure blocks of fine stone
for the sarcophagus of Pepi and his successor, and also for the pyramid
of the latter.[153]

The removal of the centre of the kingdom from Memphis, which is
noticeable under the family of Pepi, was completely carried out under a
later house, which is stated in the lists to belong to Thebes--the
eleventh and twelfth dynasty of Manetho. Upper Egypt became the seat of
the royal power; Thebes (the No-Amon, _i.e._ possession of Ammon, of the
Hebrews) took her place beside Memphis. The princes of this new dynasty
are no longer called in the monuments the lords of Upper and Lower
Egypt, but the "lords of both lands;" they always wear both crowns.
Hence it is possible that this royal house in the first instance ruled
over Upper Egypt only from Thebes, and that for a long time Upper and
Lower Egypt existed side by side independently, till the kings of Thebes
succeeded in reducing Lower Egypt under their dominion.

Of Amenemha, the first king of this house, who ruled over Upper and
Lower Egypt (2380-2371 B.C.), a colossal figure of red granite is still
in existence, which was discovered in Lower Egypt at Tanis (San), not
far from Lake Menzaleh.[154] His power must have extended up the Nile
over the adjacent part of Nubia, for a pillar discovered there informs
us that he intrusted an officer with the superintendence of the gold
mines in Nubia.[155] His successor, Sesurtesen I. (2371-2325 B.C.),
erected a temple to Ammon at Thebes, and set up obelisks, _i.e._ pointed
monolithic pillars, dedicated to the sun-god, in Lower Egypt, in Fayum,
and at Heliopolis. The obelisk at Fayum, not far from the ancient
Arsinoe, was about forty feet in height; it has been broken by the fall
into two pieces. The obelisk of Heliopolis is sixty feet in height; it
still towers over the ruins of this city, near the village of Matarieh.
It is not the first obelisk erected in Egypt, for the inscriptions of
Chufu mention an obelisk erected by that king, but it is the oldest
which has come down to our time. The inscription, repeated on all four
sides, runs thus:--"Horus, the life of that which is born, the child of
the sun, Sesurtesen, who is beloved by the spirits of Heliopolis, who
will live for ever, the golden hawk, the life of that which is born,
this gracious god has erected this obelisk at the beginning of the great
festival. He has erected it who assures us of life for ever."[156] That
this king also ruled in Nubia, and forced his way far up the Nile above
Egypt, is proved by a monument in Nubia on the cataracts of the Wadi
Halfa; a pillar, on which is depicted Sesurtesen, representing Nubians
and negroes, the prisoners of eight nations or tribes, to the god
Horus.[157] In the rock tombs of Beni Hassan is buried an officer of
this king, Amenj, overseer of the canton of Hermopolis (Ashmunein). The
inscription tells us that Amenj had served the king when on a campaign
to destroy his enemies; that he had approached the land of Cush, and
reached the limits of the earth. The king had returned in peace after
the overthrow of his enemies. Afterwards Amenj with 600 warriors had
conveyed the produce of the goldmines from the canton of Hermopolis to
the stronghold of Coptus. He had loved his canton; and all the works
required for the house of the king he had carried out in his canton by
his own arm, and had paid in the tribute. He had laboured, and the
canton had been in full activity. He had not afflicted the children, or
ill-treated the widows; he had not disturbed the fishermen, or hindered
the herdsmen. Famine had never prevailed, because every plot had been
planted. He had caused the inhabitants to live, had given gifts without
regarding the great before the small.[158] The fragment of a seated
colossus of Sesurtesen I., of black granite, is to be seen in the museum
at Berlin; his colossus of red granite is at Tanis. A third statue of
this king has been found at Abydus.[159]

Amenemha II. and Sesurtesen II. carried on the campaigns of the first
Sesurtesen in the south of Egypt. A monument in the valley of Hamamat
exhibits battles with the Punt, _i.e._ with the tribes of the Arabians
and the negroes.[160] Sesurtesen III., who succeeded Sesurtesen II.,
completed the subjugation of Lower Nubia. To protect the new border
of the kingdom, he caused fortresses to be erected a little above
the falls of the Wadi Halfa, at Semne and Kumne, about 250 miles
south of Syene. A pillar discovered in this district has the following
inscription:--"Southern border; erected in the eighth year, under the
rule of his holiness King Sesurtesen III., who gives life for all
eternity. No negro shall pass over it on his way, except the boats
laden with the oxen, goats, and asses of the negroes."[161]

The third Sesurtesen was followed by the third Amenemha (2221 to 2179
B.C.). Inscriptions in the Wadi Maghara, in the peninsula of Sinai, tell
us that Amenemha III. caused the copper to be conveyed from the mines
there by 734 soldiers, in the second year of his reign; and inscriptions
in the valley of Hamamat show that the quarries there were frequently
used by this king.[162] Near the fortifications of his predecessor, on
the rocks of Semne and Kumne, are found numerous records of the height
reached by the Nile in the reign of Amenemha III. Here we read--"Level
of Hapi (the Nile) in the fourteenth, sixteenth, thirtieth years, &c.,
under his holiness King Amenemha III., who lives for ever." From these
observations we find that the average height of the inundations at that
time was more than twenty-four feet higher than at present; and the
greatest height reached under Amenemha III. was twenty-seven feet above
the greatest height of modern times.[163]

Herodotus tells us the following story;--Among the successors of Menes,
Moeris carried out some remarkable works; he built the north gateway in
the temple of Hephaestus, excavated a great lake, and erected pyramids
in it. "The priests told me that under the rule of Moeris, the Nile
overflowed the land below Memphis, although it had only risen to the
height of eight cubits, but now the water does not cover the land unless
it reaches a height of sixteen or at least fifteen cubits; and it seems
to me that if the land were raised again in the same proportion, the
Egyptians who live in the Delta below the lake of Moeris would be in
distress. The circuit of the lake of Moeris is about 3,600 stades, or
sixty schoenes, and the depth in the deepest place about fifty fathoms.
The lake extends from north to south. That it was the work of human
hands, is clear from the nature of it. About the middle are two
pyramids, each of which rises about fifty fathoms out of the water, and
on each is a stone colossus seated on a throne. The water of the lake
does not arise from springs, for the whole district there is entirely
without water, it is introduced by a canal from the Nile. For six months
the water flows from the Nile into the lake, and again for six months
from the lake into the Nile. While it runs out the fishery brings in a
talent of silver a day for the King's treasury; but when the water flows
into the lake the product is a third of a talent only.[164]"

Diodorus tells us that king Moeris erected the north gateway at Memphis,
the splendour of which excelled all others; and above the city at about
ten schoenes distance he excavated a lake of marvellous utility and
incredible size. The circuit was 3,600 stades, and the depth in most
places was fifty fathoms. "Who would not ask, when contemplating the
vast extent of this work, how many myriads of men were required to
complete it, and for how many years? But no one could ever speak in
worthy terms of the utility of the lake and the advantage it is to the
inhabitants of Egypt and the wise prudence of the king in making it. As
the Nile does not rise evenly, and the fruitfulness of the land depends
on the evenness of the overflow, Moeris excavated this lake to receive
the superfluous water, in order that an excessive inundation might not
create marshes and morasses, or a deficiency of water imperil the
fruitfulness of the soil. He carried a canal 300 feet in breadth from
the river for eighty stades (about ten miles) to the lake, through which
he first admitted the superfluous water and then drew it off. In this
way he procured for the tillers of the soil the desired medium in the
water, since the mouth of the canal was sometimes closed, sometimes
opened, which was both a difficult and costly thing to do. The lake has
remained to our time, and is still called by the name of the
constructor, the lake of Moeris. In the middle, the king who excavated
it left a place on which he built his own tomb, and two pyramids. One
was erected for himself, the other for his wife. On these he placed
stone statues of himself and his wife, sitting on thrones, in the
impression that by means of this work he would be for ever held in
grateful remembrance."[165]

Of the lake above Memphis, Strabo gives the following account:--"The
canton of the city Arsinoe, which was formerly known as the City of
Crocodiles, surpasses all others in the beauty of its appearance, in
fruitfulness, and also in the wonders to be seen there. It alone is
covered with green and large olive trees, whereas there are no olives
in the rest of Egypt; it produces a considerable amount of wine, and
corn, and pulse, and many other cereals. In it also lies the wonderful
lake of Moeris, which in size and colour is like a sea, and has shores
like the shores of the sea. Owing to its size and depth this lake is
able to receive the superfluous water at the time of the inundation, so
that it does not overflow the inhabited and planted districts. On the
other hand, when the river begins to subside, after it has poured the
overflow into one of the two mouths of the canal, the lake and the canal
together retain the water required for irrigation. This takes place in
the natural course of things, but there are also artificial sluices at
both mouths of the canal, by which the persons in charge regulate the
rise and fall of the water." Tacitus also mentions "the excavated lake
which receives the overflow of the Nile."[166]

From these accounts the object of the work is clear. It was intended to
regulate the inundation by a large reservoir, and so to increase its
beneficent effects upon the soil of Egypt. The inundation was to be
reduced for the Delta by drawing off a part of the water, which had
risen into this basin in the neighbourhood of Memphis, in order that the
land in this district might not be rendered swampy, and the marshes
might have time to dry. This basin could also retain a portion of water
in the superabundant years of excessive inundation, in order to supply
the deficiencies of other years when the water did not reach the highest
plots. Further, the reservoir might be used to irrigate the arable land
in the neighbourhood during the waterless months, when there was no
inundation.

A few miles above Memphis the Libyan range is divided by a depression.
This cleft leads from the Nile into a spacious urn-shaped valley, now
called Fayum, of which the western part is filled by a large lake. On
the ruins near this lake, the name of King Amenemha III. is frequently
read. If we remember that the careful observations of the rise of the
Nile from the reign of this king tend to show that he was busily engaged
with the irrigation of the land, that the Egyptians call this lake the
lake of inundation (_meri_), and that the king Moeris of the Greeks
owes his name to this title (_suten en meri_), we may regard Amenemha
III. as the author of the wonderful hydraulic structures at Fayum. The
great reservoir, which he constructed, is no longer in existence, but
the remains of it can be traced in dams and in the modern lake of Fayum,
the Birket-el-Kerun. The urn-shaped valley of Fayum offered a situation
for a basin near the Nile, which might receive and preserve part of the
inundation, and the depression in the Libyan range secured a natural
path for the canal, required to feed the basin from the Nile, and the
Nile from the basin. For the site of the basin the nearest part of the
valley was selected; it was enough that the bed of the reservoir was not
lower than the lowest level of the Nile. No deep excavations were
needed; all that was required was to enclose a large part of the valley
with strong dams; and the earth necessary for erecting these could be
taken out of the enclosed space. These dams must have been massive
enough to retain a large body of water, and prevent it from breaking out
into the western, and far lower part of the valley, and at the same time
of sufficient height to prevent any overflow even in the times of the
highest inundations. At the eastern entrance into Fayum we find running
from the valley of the Nile the remains of long, rectilinear, and very
massive banks, in which modern research has recognised the original
enclosure of the lake of Moeris. The breadth of the dams appears to have
been carried to 150 feet; whereas the height can hardly have exceeded
thirty feet.[167] When Herodotus tells us that the depth of the basin in
the deepest part was fifty fathoms, it is obvious that the statement
rests on the computation that the two pyramids in the middle of the lake
were of the same height under as above the surface. The same authority
allows a circuit of about 450 miles for the lake, but from the remains
we cannot allow a greater circuit than 150 miles.[168] The Egyptians
were sufficiently skilled in the erection of strong dams, and structures
of such an extent could not be in excess of the resources of a country
which had erected the great pyramids. Finally, when Herodotus asks what
had become of the earth dug out of this great lake, the answer is that
there was no complete excavation, but merely the enclosure of a certain
space of land, and what was taken out of this was at once applied to the
construction of the dams.

The statement of the priests about the height of the inundation in the
reign of Moeris, which Herodotus has preserved for us, and from which he
has drawn the conclusion that the soil of Lower Egypt must have risen
since that reign from seven to eight cubits in height, is much
exaggerated. The deposit of mud in consequence of the inundation raises
the soil only about four inches in 100 years, that is, about
three-and-a-quarter feet in 1,000 years. Supposing the basin of Amenemha
to have been completed 1,500 years before Herodotus travelled in Egypt,
the difference in the required height of the inundation might reach
three or four cubits, but not seven or eight. Yet the raising of the
soil, and more especially of the bed of the great basin, which rose far
more rapidly than the surface of the land, brought about the decay, and
at last the ruin, of this reservoir. The bed of the basin in which the
water remained the whole year through, and not for three or four months
only, must have been raised by the deposit at a peculiarly rapid rate;
at the present time it shows a height of eleven feet as compared with
the land outside the remains of the dams.[169] With this rise in the
bed, the value of the basin diminished in proportion as the amount of
water which the reservoir was capable of receiving was lessened. It was
useless to raise the height of the dams, for the influx of the water
from the Nile depended on the level of the bed of the connecting canal,
and of the basin. These causes along with the disaffection of later
times must have brought about the decay of the reservoir, the value of
which Diodorus places so high, and which was in existence in the time of
Tacitus. At a later period the dams must have been neglected, so that at
the time of some extraordinary inundation, a breach was made towards the
west, which filled the western and lowest part of Fayum with water. This
is the origin of the Birket-el-Kerun, the water of which is still
sufficient to convert the largest part of Fayum into one of the most
fertile and blooming districts of Egypt. The level of the
Birket-el-Kerun is seventy feet lower than the canal which once
connected the reservoir with the Nile.[170]

"A little above Lake Moeris," Herodotus tells us, "at the so-called City
of the Crocodiles, is the labyrinth. I have seen it, and it outdoes its
reputation. If any one were to put together the walls and buildings of
the Hellenes, he would find that they were surpassed in labour and cost
by this labyrinth alone, although the temples at Ephesus and Samos are
certainly well worth speaking of. The pyramids are indeed beyond all
description, and each of them is equivalent to many of the greatest
works of Hellas, but the labyrinth surpasses even the pyramids. It
contains twelve roofed courts, abutting on each other, the entrances to
which are opposite, six to the north and six to the south. Externally
they are all included in one wall. The chambers are of two kinds, some
are under the ground, others visible above it; of each kind there are
1,500. Those above ground I have passed through, and can speak of them
from eyesight; those under the ground the Egyptian overseers could not
be induced to show me, because, as they said, they contained the
sepulchres of the kings who built the labyrinth, and of the sacred
crocodiles. Of these, therefore, I can only speak from hearsay: but the
chambers above ground, which I saw, are a superhuman work. The entrances
through the covered spaces, and the windings through the courts are very
complicated, and excite infinite wonder, as you pass from the courts
into the chambers, and from the chambers into colonnades, and from these
into other covered spaces, and from the chambers into other courts. On
all these spaces lies a roof of stone, similar to the walls; the walls
are covered with carved pictures, and each court is surrounded on the
inside with pillars of white stones, excellently fitted together. In the
angle where the labyrinth ends there is a pyramid forty fathoms high,
with large figures cut into it. The entrance to this is under the
surface."[171]

Diodorus says:--"One of the old kings, named Menas, built on the lake of
Moeris, the City of Crocodiles, a tomb for himself, a square pyramid,
and the marvellous labyrinth." In another passage he says: "King Mendes,
whom some call Marrhus, was not distinguished by any military
achievements, but he built for his tomb the so-called labyrinth, which
is marvellous not so much for its size as for the inimitable art of the
structure. Without a thoroughly competent guide, it would not be easy
for any one to find his way out." And in a third passage we are told:
"The labyrinth at the entrance into Lake Moeris is a square
structure--each side measuring a stadium--built of the most beautiful
stone, unsurpassed in the sculptures and the art bestowed upon it."
"Passing through the enclosure, you see a house surrounded with pillars,
forty on each side, and with a roof of a single stone, adorned with
mullions in relief, and various paintings. It also contains the
monuments of the twelve provinces of Egypt of their sacred relics and
sacrifices, all represented in the most excellent pictures."[172]

Strabo's account is as follows:--"At the sluices (of the canal
connecting the basin and the lake) is the labyrinth, a work as great as
the pyramids, and moreover the grave of the king who built it. About
thirty or forty stades above the mouth of the canal is a table-land, on
which lies a hamlet and a palace made up of as many palaces as there are
districts in Egypt. For so many in number are the colonnaded courts,
adjoining each other in a row, and abutting on a partition against which
they are built as against a long wall.[173] The entrances which lead to
them are over against the wall. Before these entrances lie dark
chambers, long in shape, and numerous, which are connected with each
other by winding passages, so that without a guide it is impossible for
the stranger to find the entrance or exit belonging to each court. The
most marvellous thing is that the roof of each chamber consists of a
single stone. Even the dark passages (before the entrances into the
courts) are covered with slabs of a single stone, from side to side,
without use of wood or other support, and these slabs are of
extraordinary size. If you go out on the roof, and as there is but one
story, it is not high, you find before you a plateau of stones of this
kind. If from this point you look again into the courts, you see them
twenty-seven in number in a row, supported by pillars of a single stone.
The walls also are of stones not less in size. This number of courts are
said to have been erected because it was the custom for all the
districts to assemble here by their representatives, with their priests
and animals for sacrifice, in order to offer sacrifice and decide
matters of the greatest importance. Each district thus met in its own
court. At the end of the structure, which extends over more than a
stadium (in the square), lies the tomb, a square pyramid, of which each
side is about a plethron in length and the same in height. The king
buried there is called Ismandes."[174]

"The labyrinth," remarks Pliny, "is still existing in Egypt, though it
is said to have been erected more than 3,600 years. Lykeas calls it the
tomb of Moeris; some authorities assert that it is a shrine of the
Sun-god, and this is the general belief. The entrance was built of
Parian marble, which is astonishing to me, the remainder of joined
blocks of granite, which centuries have not been able to destroy,
albeit assisted by the inhabitants of Heracleopolis, who regard this
structure with the greatest detestation, and treat it accordingly. The
plan of the whole and the various parts it is impossible to describe. It
is divided according to the districts and prefectures, which they call
nomes; these are twenty-five in number, and their names are given to an
equal number of large buildings. Besides this it contains a temple of
all the gods of Egypt, and includes above 1,500 small buildings. The
chambers are lofty, and each colonnade is ascended by a flight of ninety
steps. Within are pillars of porphyry, images of the gods, statues of
the kings, and monstrous shapes. Through the greater part you pass in
darkness. From the wing attached to the labyrinth, passages lead through
the rock to underground chambers, and there is also a pyramid belonging
to it."[175]

As we have seen, Diodorus in one passage ascribes the building of the
labyrinth to the ancient king Menas, and in another to king Mendes, whom
other authorities call Marrhus, and at last he says that the twelve
kings, who reigned in Egypt after the dominion of the Ethiopians, built
the labyrinth for their common sepulchre. Four hundred years before his
time Herodotus had stated that the twelve kings built it as a common
memorial of their reign. Lykeas mentioned king Moeris as the builder,
and Strabo told us that the king buried in it was Ismandes, a name which
would agree with the Mendes of Diodorus. According to the lists of
Manetho, it was the fourth ruler of the twelfth dynasty--Lacharis in the
excerpt of Africanus, and Lamaris in that of Eusebius--who built the
labyrinth in the province of Arsinoe for his own sepulchre.

The Menas of Diodorus may be an abbreviation of Amenemha, and this
supposition becomes the more probable because the king called Moeris by
the Greeks is mentioned as a builder of the labyrinth. The remains of
the building, on the north side of which the pyramid is still standing,
raise this supposition into a certainty. At the entrance to this
pyramid, on the pillars and architraves in the ruins, the name of
Amenemha III. is repeatedly found.[176]

We must assume, therefore, that in the district which he had recovered
from the desert by means of his large reservoir, king Amenemha built a
large national temple close to the basin, and in this temple it was
intended that all the provinces of Upper and Lower Egypt should see the
deities of their land reproduced in separate courts and temples. Then
the Egyptians may have ascribed a restoration of this imperial temple,
this pantheon, to the supposed twelve kings who were thought to have
reigned after the Ethiopian dominion. This tradition is obviously at the
bottom of the accounts of Herodotus and Diodorus, who carry the building
back to the seventh century B.C. The ruins of the labyrinth lie near the
modern village of Hauara, among orchards and palm groves, beside rose
gardens and sugar plantations, surrounded by fruitful fields, in a
district which is still flourishing and covered with villages, bounded
to the west by naked ridges of rock and the sand of the desert. They
consist of blocks of granite and dazzling white limestone, which
explains the supposed Parian marble in Pliny, the remains of walls and
the capitals of pillars. The extent of the structure reaches 600 feet in
length and 500 in width; the traces of numerous chambers, some large
and some very small, but all rectangular, are still visible both above
and under the ground. In the centre is a clear space, once perhaps
filled by the courts, of which Herodotus enumerates twelve and Strabo
twenty-seven. The pyramid consists of a core built of bricks, and was
cased with sculptures, of which, however, there are very slight remains;
each side measured 300 feet in length. It was the sepulchre of Amenemha;
here, among his great creations, he lay at rest.

In addition to the monuments in Nubia, and this great building, the lake
which ripples against the labyrinth is a most eloquent witness of the
prosperity to which this dynasty of the Amenemha and Sesurtesen raised
Egypt. The population must have been already very numerous when it came
to recovering fresh land from the desert, and attention was turned
towards increasing and improving the rich fertilization which nature
every year secured for Egypt. The picture of the richly developed
cultivation, of which these structures exhibit the highest point, is
supplemented by the insight into the details of the circumstances of the
country permitted by the rock tombs of Beni Hassan, Bersheh, and Sioot
(in Central Egypt), which belong to this period of Egyptian history. At
Beni Hassan, where the tombs go back to the reign of the first
Sesurtesen, we see the entire process of agriculture. Oxen or slaves are
drawing the ploughs, of which five different kinds are in use. Sheep and
goats tread the seed into the ground. The corn when cut is gathered into
sheaves, trodden out by oxen, measured, and carried in sacks to the
granary. The flax is packed upon the backs of asses, the lotus, the
vintage, and the figs are gathered in. The vintage is partly trodden
out, partly squeezed in a press moved by a lever; the wine is poured
into jars, and carried into a cellar. We see the irrigation of the
fields, the planting of the gardens, the cultivation of onions, the
overseer and his clerks. The overseer passes sentence on the lazy and
negligent slaves: when he has heard the complaint and the answer, he
orders the bastinado to be applied to the culprits, and hands to his
master the written account of the matter. With equal minuteness we can
follow the breeding of cattle. We see fine herds of oxen, cows, and
calves, asses, sheep, and goats in the stalls or at pasture with their
keepers; we see the cows milked, the butter and cheese prepared. The
fowl-yards are filled with a multitude of different ducks and geese. In
the same way by following the pictures on the graves at Beni Hassan we
can obtain an accurate view of the process of the various manufactures.
We see the spinners and weavers at work; we can follow the potter
through all the stages of his work, from the first kneading of the clay
to the burning of the finished jar. The carpenter and joiner, the
currier, the shoemaker, the smith and goldsmith, the mason and painter,
pursue their occupations before our eyes. We see rudders, lances,
javelins, bows and arrows, clubs and war-axes preparing: and lastly we
have the manufacture of glass, even the blowing, in all the various
operations before us. With similar minuteness we can see the interior of
the Egyptian house, simply or splendidly furnished, with all the movable
goods, the dogs, cats, and apes belonging to the inhabitants; there are
the servants at their work, and the operations of the kitchen in great
detail. Further we find soldiers of every rank, and with all kinds of
weapons; we see them exercising military drill; the battle, the siege,
the ram, which is brought up against the walls of the enemy, the roof
of shields under which the besieging army advanced to storm the
wall--all these are before us. Birding is carried on by means of traps
and nets, angling by hooks and spears of two or three tines; there is
hunting in its various modes. Long rows of wrestlers exhibit all the
various positions of their sport, which seems to have been much in
vogue; along with this various games exhibiting strength or endurance
were carried on; among others, games of ball and mora. We see dancers,
male and female, in various and sometimes very intricate positions;
harps and flutes of very different shapes are played upon. A singer is
accompanied by a musician on a harp, and the concert is completed by two
choruses, one of men, the other of women, who clap their hands. The
better class are depicted in gaily-coloured skiffs and palanquins,
surrounded by numerous servants, among whom may be observed a
considerable number of negroes. Dwarfs and deformed persons are also
found in their train.

The most splendid tomb at Beni Hassan belongs to Chnumhotep, the son of
Nehera, who, as the inscriptions tell us, was a minister of Amenemha II.
and Sesurtesen II. Like Amenj before him, he was the overseer of the
province of Hermopolis (Ashmunein). A picture on his tomb exhibits a
huge portrait of Chnumhotep, with a staff in his hand, and a scribe at
his side; before him are a number of smaller figures, who, to judge from
their shape and clothing, are foreigners. The chief among the
foreigners, clad in a gay garment, leads forward an antelope and makes a
reverential obeisance before the minister. His companions are more
simply clad, and armed with lances and bows; one of them is striking a
lute with the plectrum. Four women follow, in long gaily embroidered
garments, with their heads veiled. An ass driven by a boy with a lance
carries two children, and a second ass arms and utensils. The leaf of
papyrus, which the scribe of Chnumhotep is handing to his master informs
us that Abusa (Abscha) with thirty-six companions from the nation of the
Aamu (nomads of the East), had brought presents to the minister of the
province of Hermopolis in the sixth year of Sesurtesen III.[177]

If we compare the works of that epoch, which saw the erection of the
great pyramids, in technical and artistic value with the remains which
have come down from the time of the Amenemha and Sesurtesen--according
to the chronology of Lepsius the two periods are separated by an
interval of six centuries--we find in the great monuments of the first
epoch, in their passages and chambers, a dexterity in the use of stone
for building, which has never been surpassed. The sculptures exhibit
broader and stouter forms, with more strongly-marked but well-shaped
muscles. The ornaments consist of simple, straight lines, besides which
scarcely any other adornment is found beyond the lotus leaf. The style
is composed and full of repose; it remains nearer nature than in the
later works. In the monuments of the time of the Sesurtesen and Amenemha
the ornamentation has already become far richer. The pillars are
massive, fluted, and crowned by a simple cube. The sculptured forms are
taller and thinner; the work in relief, carried out with much industry
and delicacy, displays at times very happy moments of natural grace and
truth of expression, although perspective is entirely left out of
sight. Such work is always carefully painted. The statues of limestone
are also painted throughout; in those of granite, only the clothing, the
eyes and the hair are coloured.[178]

FOOTNOTES:

[130] Diod. 1, 12, 45.

[131] Herod. 2, 99.

[132] Diod. 1, 50. He ascribes the foundation of the city to a later
king, whom he calls Uchoreus.

[133] Strabo, p. 808; Tac. "Ann." 2, 6.

[134] Lepsius asserts that he found traces and remains of sixty-seven
pyramids. "Briefe aus Ægypten," s. 65.

[135] Lepsius, "Abh. der Berl. Akad." 1843, s. 177 ff.

[136] Boeckh, "Metrologie," s. 236.

[137] Herod. 2, 124-127, 134.

[138] Diod. 1, 63, 64.

[139] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 35.

[140] Cf. Strabo. p. 809.

[141] Lepsius, "Chronologie," s. 248, 302. Gutschmid has supported the
Herodotean inscription on the strength of papyri from the times of
Ramses Miamen in Philologus, 10, 644; the "talents" in any case must be
left for the dragoman.

[142] Lepsius, "Denkmale," 3, 2, plate II.

[143] De Rougé, "Monuments des six premières dynasties; Mémoires de
l'Institut," 1856, 25, 265 ff.

[144] Lepsius, "Denkmale," 3, 2, plate II.

[145] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 113.

[146] Brugsch, "Zeitschrift für aegyptische Sprache," 1864, s. 61.

[147] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ p. 257.

[148] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ pp. 282, 283.

[149] Herod. 2, 128. M. Büdinger ("Zur ægypt. Forschung Herodot's." s.
24) identifies this Philitis with the shepherd-king Salatis; cf. infra.

[150] Cf. above, p. 59. Mariette, "Revue archéol." 1860, p. 18.

[151] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ pp. 281, 307.

[152] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ p. 267.

[153] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ p. 328 ff.

[154] "Revue archéolog." 1862, p. 279.

[155] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 53.

[156] Rosellini, "Monumenti storici," 3, 33. Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte,"
p. 54.

[157] Rosellini, _loc. cit._ 1, 38.

[158] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 55, 56.

[159] "Revue archéolog." 1862, p. 297; 1864, p. 69.

[160] Bunsen, "Ægypt." 2, 323; Lepsius, "Chronolog." s. 287.

[161] Lepsius, "Briefe aus Ægypten," s. 259. On the fortifications, De
Vogüé, "Athen. franz." Sept. 55, p. 84.

[162] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp. 68, 69.

[163] Lepsius, _loc. cit._ s, 81; Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 67.

[164] Herod. 2, 13, 101, 149.

[165] Diod. 1, 51, 52. "This is what the Egyptians tell of Moeris."

[166] Strabo. p. 809-811. Tac. Annal. 2, 61.

[167] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 81.

[168] Linant, "Mémoire sur le lac Moeris."

[169] Lepsius, _loc. cit._

[170] Linant, _loc. cit._

[171] Herod. 2, 148.

[172] Diod. 1, 89, 66, 61.

[173] Strabo. p. 811; for [Greek: teichous mikrou] we must obviously
read [Greek: makrou], and for [Greek: echontes, echontos].

[174] Strabo. p. 811; cf. 813.

[175] Plin. "Hist. Nat." 36, 19. As the building was actually not more
than a stadium square, the statement of Herodotus that there were 1500
chambers above the earth--quite irrespective of the 1500 underground--is
inexplicable, unless the chambers were very small. In Pliny we must read
1500 for 15,000.

[176] Lepsius, "Briefe aus Ægypten," s. 74 ff.

[177] Brugsch, "Histoire d'Egypte," p. 63; Ebers, "Die Bücher Mose's,"
s. 98.

[178] De Rougé in Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 69.




CHAPTER V.

THE HYKSOS AND THE RESTORATION OF THE EGYPTIAN KINGDOM.


In spite of the union of Upper and Lower Egypt, and the extension of the
Egyptian dominion up the Nile as far as Semne and Kumne, the kingdom of
the pyramids, of the lake of Moeris, and the labyrinth succumbed to the
attack of a foreign enemy. According to Josephus, Manetho, in the second
book of his Egyptian History, gave the following account: "There was a
king Amyntimaeus. In his reign the divine power, I know not why, was
ungracious. From the East came an unexpected swarm of men belonging to a
tribe of no great reputation, with a bold resolution of taking the
country. This they succeeded in doing without much trouble. They made
themselves masters of the ruling princes, ruthlessly set fire to the
cities, and destroyed the shrines of the gods. Towards the inhabitants
they behaved in a most hostile manner; some they put to the sword, from
others they carried away their wives and children into slavery. At last
they made one of their own number, by name Salatis, their king. He took
up his abode at Memphis, collected tribute from the Upper and Lower
country, and placed garrisons in the most suitable places. The eastern
districts were fortified most strongly, since he foresaw that the
Assyrians, who were then growing in power, would be seized with the
desire of invading his country. In the Saitic (Sethroitic) province he
found a city excellently adapted for his purpose, lying eastwards of the
river from Bubastis, and called Avaris, from some old legend or another.
This he surrounded with the strongest walls, filled it with inhabitants,
and placed there the bulk of his armed soldiers, 240,000 men, as a
garrison. In the summer he visited this stronghold to measure the corn,
pay his soldiers, and exercise his troops in order to strike fear in
those who dwelt beyond the fortress. After a reign of nineteen years
Salatis died. After him reigned a king of the name of Beon, for
forty-four years, then Apachnas for thirty-six years and seven months,
then Apophis for sixty-one years, and Annas for fifty years and one
month, and finally Assis for forty-nine years and two months. These six
were their first rulers, and they sought more and more to destroy Egypt
to the very root. The whole tribe was called Hyksos, _i.e._ shepherd
kings. For in the sacred language _hyk_ means 'king,' and _sos_ in the
ordinary dialect is 'a shepherd,' and from composition of the two comes
the word Hyksos. Some authorities say that they were Arabs." "The
shepherd kings named above and their descendants are supposed by Manetho
to have ruled over Egypt for 511 years. Yet he afterwards tells us that
kings arose in the district of Thebes and the rest of Egypt, between
whom and the shepherds there was a long and severe struggle. In the
reign of a king named Misphragmuthosis the shepherds were defeated by
the king, driven out of Egypt, and confined in one place, 10,000 arouræ
in extent, the name of which was Avaris. This space, as Manetho tells
us, the shepherds surrounded with a great and strong wall, in order to
preserve their possessions and their booty in security. But Tuthmosis,
the son of Misphragmuthosis, attempted to take Avaris by force, and led
out 480,000 men before the walls. When he found that the investment made
but little way, he came to terms with the shepherds, permitting them to
leave Egypt uninjured and go whither they would. On these terms they
departed from Egypt with their families, and goods, not less than
240,000 strong, and went into the Syrian desert, and through fear of the
Assyrians, who were then the great power in Asia, they built a city in
the land now called Judæa, large enough to contain their numbers, and
named it Jerusalem."

The short excerpts made by Africanus and Eusebius from the Egyptian
History of Manetho only tell that "there were certain foreign kings,
Phenicians, who took Memphis, and built a city in the Sethroitic
province, from which they went forth and subdued the Egyptians."
Africanus gives six, Eusebius four, names of these foreign kings, which
are somewhat the same in sound as those in Josephus, only in Africanus
Apophis is the last in the list, not last but two.[179]

If Josephus has transcribed and reproduced Manetho correctly there is an
obvious contradiction in his narrative. The first shepherd king,
Salatis, fortified and peopled Avaris, and placed there a garrison of
240,000 men, for protection against the Assyrians. Then after a lapse of
511 (or according to the excerpt of Africanus of 953) years, when the
shepherds had lost Egypt they were shut up in a place containing 10,000
arouræ, _i.e._ a square of twenty-five miles, of the name of Avaris,
which they surrounded with a strong wall in order to keep their
possessions and booty in security. At last they were compelled to
retire even from this, and march out in just the same strength as the
garrison which Salatis had placed so long before at Avaris, towards
Judæa, and here they founded a second city of Jerusalem, also for
protection against the Assyrians.

We may leave the Assyrians out of the question, and assume that the
reference to them has been transferred by Manetho from the later
position which Assyria took up towards Syria and Egypt in the eighth and
seventh centuries B.C. to those earlier times; we may also regard the
turn of the narrative, which makes the shepherds the ancestors of the
Jews and builders of Jerusalem, as a combination invented by Manetho,
for in the tradition of the Hebrews there is no hint that their
ancestors had once ruled over Egypt for centuries, and Jerusalem down to
the time of David was merely the stronghold of a small tribe, the
Jebusites. Still it remains inexplicable that these shepherds, who,
after they had taken Egypt, or, in order to take it, fortified Avaris,
and garrisoned it with 240,000 men, should fortify Avaris a second time
centuries later, in order to maintain their last possession in Egypt,
and at last march out of Avaris in exactly the same numbers as the
garrison originally settled there. Shepherds, _i.e._ nomads, do not make
war by building fortresses as a base of operations for extending their
conquests; they had nothing to gain by conquering Egypt for the mere
purpose of shutting up the whole or the greater part of their numbers
with their flocks in a fortified place. On the other hand, it might have
seemed advisable to them, when they had subjugated Egypt, to possess a
fortified place on the eastern border, in order to keep up a connection
with their tribe; and it was natural that the shepherds, when the
Egyptians had risen against them with success, and they were no longer
able to hold the Delta, should attempt to maintain themselves in the
flats and swamps of the Eastern Delta; and when forced to act on the
defensive should fortify their camp at Avaris in this district.

In the narrative of Manetho we can accept no more than the facts that
Egypt succumbed to the attack of the shepherds, and that they, to take
the lower estimate, ruled over Egypt for five centuries. Herodotus also
learnt in Egypt that the shepherd Philitis had once pastured his flocks
at Memphis. There is nothing wonderful in such an occurrence. Nomad
tribes dwelt in the deserts on the east and west of Egypt, to whose
poverty and scanty means of subsistence the abundance and cultivation of
Egypt must have presented a continual temptation. That temptation would
increase in force when the tribes became more numerous, when unusual
heat diminished the springs in the oases, and robbed these shepherds of
the produce of their scanty agriculture. The tradition of the Hebrews
tells us that their ancestor Abraham went to Egypt when "there was a
famine in the land," and the sons of Jacob bought corn in Egypt.

According to Manetho's account, the tribes from whom the attack
proceeded were not famous, and he regarded the invaders as coming from
the east. The peninsula of Sinai, Northern Arabia, and the Syrian desert
sheltered in the Amalekites, Horites, Edomites, and Midianites, tribes
who were rendered hardy and warlike by life in the desert, tribal feuds,
and raids for plunder; and these may very well have united in
considerable number under some leader of military genius, and attempted
the invasion of the rich river-valley in their neighbourhood. According
to Manetho, the invaders were Phenicians or Arabians. The name of the
shepherd Philitis, given by Herodotus, points to a Semitic tribe, and
one immediately bordering on Egypt on the Syrian coast--the Philistines
(Pelischtim), from whom the whole Syrian coast was called by the Greeks
Palæstina. The name of the stronghold of the shepherds, Avaris, or
Abaris, recurs in Hauara, a town of Arabia on the shore of the Red
Sea.[180] If the shepherds who conquered Egypt had not been Semitic, and
closely related to the Hebrews, Manetho would not have made them the
ancestors of the Hebrews and founders of Jerusalem after their expulsion
from Egypt.

After the conquest, the chiefs of the shepherds ruled over Egypt. The
inscriptions on the monuments repeatedly denote certain tribes in the
east of Egypt by the name Schasu, which in the later language is
contracted into Sôs. _Schasu_ means shepherds. Moreover, in old
Egyptian, the head of a family, a tribe, and a province is called _hak_,
and Hyksos thus can be explained by _Haku-schasu_, chiefs of the
shepherds, shepherd kings, as Josephus, Eusebius, and Africanus render
it.[181] What Manetho tells us of the destruction of the cities and
shrines, the slaughter and enslaving of the Egyptians may be correct for
the time of the war and conquest. But this hostility and destruction
cannot, as he intimates, have gone on for centuries, for, on the
restoration of the Pharaohs, we find ancient Egypt unimpaired in
population, unchanged in language, customs, and manners, in civilisation
and art. If the national development was interrupted and repressed by
the Hyksos, it still remained uninjured at the core, so far as we have
the means of judging.

When at a subsequent period the kings of Ethiopia subjugated Egypt, the
warrior caste, the soldiers settled in the country by the Pharaohs, were
deprived of their lands. The same thing may have taken place on the
irruption of the shepherds. The warriors of the Pharaohs fell in battle,
were carried away as prisoners, or deprived of their weapons; and in
their place came the victorious army of the shepherds. Of these many
would soon return home laden with the booty of Egypt, others pitched
their tents in the conquered land, and settled in the greenest meadows,
more especially in the eastern provinces of the Delta, nearest their own
home, on the Tanitic and Pelusiac arms of the Nile, and Lake Menzaleh.
The chief of the immigrants became the head of the conquerors and the
conquered. The latter would render the same abject homage to their new
masters as they rendered before and after to their native kings; and the
power which the conquered willingly acknowledged in the chief would
exalt his position even among the conquerors. As time went on, the
culture and civilisation of Egypt had their natural effect on the
barbarous invaders, and when the storm of conquest was over, we may
assume that Egypt was no worse off under the rule of the shepherd kings
than at later periods under the rule of the Persians, the Ptolemies, and
the Romans.

That the new princes, soon after the conquest, attempted to approximate
their position as much as possible to that of the ancient Pharaohs may
be concluded from the mere fact that Manetho was in a position to give a
catalogue of their reigns by years and months. But this is proved more
definitely still by certain monuments. In the neighbourhood of Lake
Menzaleh, among the ruins of the ancient Tanis, the modern San, two old
statues have been discovered, the forms and lineaments of which exhibit
a physique different from the Egyptian. In the heads of four sphinxes,
discovered in the same place, it is thought that we may recognise the
portraits of four shepherd kings, and a colossus discovered at Tel
Mokdam is said to bear the following inscription:--"The good god, the
star of both worlds, the child of the sun, Sel Salati, beloved by
Sutech, the lord of Hauar.[182]"

The six shepherd kings enumerated by Josephus from the Egyptian History
of Manetho reigned, according to the dates given by the latter, for 260
years, _i.e._ from the year 2101 B.C., in which, on Lepsius's
arrangement, the irruption of the shepherds took place, till the year
1842 B.C. Their successors must therefore have ruled over Egypt for 251
years more, _i.e._, down to the year 1591 B.C. But in the time of the
later shepherd kings, native princes again arose in Upper Egypt,
although subject to tribute. A papyrus of the British Museum tells us:
"It so happened that the land of Egypt became the possession of her
enemies, and when this took place there was no king. And behold Raskenen
became king of the country in the south. The enemy were in possession
of the fortress of Aamu (p. 120), and their chief, Ra Apepi was at
Hauar. The whole land paid tribute to him, and rendered service of all
kinds, and brought to him the produce of Lower Egypt. King Apepi chose
Sutech as his lord, and served no other god, and built him a temple of
firm and lasting structure."[183]

The power of the native princes at Thebes must have been gradually
strengthened till the successors of Raskenen were in a position to press
forward towards Lower Egypt, and place limits on the sway of the
shepherd kings, and finally to drive them entirely out of Egypt.
Josephus has already told us from Manetho that the princes of Thebes and
the rest of Egypt rose up against the shepherds, and in consequence a
long and severe struggle took place between them. In Manetho's list the
series of shepherd kings is followed by Amosis of Thebes (1684-1659
B.C.). Hence we may assume that it was under this prince that the
kingdom of Thebes got the upper hand, and the power of the shepherd
kings was restricted to the Eastern Delta.

This conclusion is established by the evidence of monuments. There
Amosis is again mentioned as king of Upper and Lower Egypt, and two
inscriptions of the twenty-second year of Amosis (1662 B.C.), in the
quarries of Massara, inform us that these quarries were opened to
restore the temples at Memphis and the temple of Ammon at Thebes.[184]
Hence by this time Amosis had again rescued the old capital, Memphis,
from the shepherds; that he also forced his way beyond Memphis, and
attacked the shepherds at Avaris, is proved by the inscription of a tomb
at El Kab, in Upper Egypt. It is the tomb of Aahmes, the son of Abuna,
the chief of the steersmen. The inscription tells us that, at the time
of Amosis, Aahmes, with his father on the boat, had ministered to "the
calf." He had not yet seen any woman, and wore the clothing of the young
men, when Hauar was attacked. When he had won a hand, he received the
king's commendation, and the golden necklace in token of his bravery. In
a second and third battle at Hauar he had again won a hand, and made a
prisoner, and he received the chain for the second and third time.[185]

From the accounts given in Josephus and the excerpts of Africanus and
Eusebius, Avaris lay eastward of the Tanitic arm of the Nile, in the
province of Sethroe. Consequently we must look for this fortified camp
of the shepherds on the eastern shore of the Lake Menzaleh, perhaps on
the site of the later Pelusium. In the lists of kings Amosis is followed
by Amenophis I., then follows Tuthmosis I., then Tuthmosis II. and III.,
under the regency of Misphra (1625-1591 B.C.). From this connection has
arisen the king Misphragmuthosis, who, in Josephus, defeats the
shepherds, drives them out of the rest of Egypt, and shuts them up in
Avaris. Hence it must have been Tuthmosis III., after the rise of the
independent monarchy (1591-1565), who led the great host of 480,000 men
against the shepherds in Avaris, and failing to enter the place by
storm, allowed them to depart unharmed, whereupon the strangers, to the
number of 240,000, retired into the Syrian desert (1591 B.C.). Yet the
inscriptions do not agree with this account. From the inscription of
Aahmes already quoted, it seems more probable that Amosis had already
taken Avaris, and that Tuthmosis I. had marched through Syria to
Naharina, _i.e._ to Mesopotamia, a fact which is confirmed by the
inscriptions of Tuthmosis III., though here also there are accounts of
battles fought by Tuthmosis II. against the Schasu, or shepherds.[186]

However this may be, after a long subjection to foreign rulers, and
weary struggles against them, the whole land of Egypt was again governed
by native kings. These battles must have invigorated the military
strength of the Egyptians; and the happy result could not but increase
the self-confidence of the new dynasty to which Egypt owed her
liberation. The mighty impulse thus given carried the kingdom quickly to
the height of its power and greatness. Tuthmosis III. caused an
enumeration to be made of the conquests which he won from the
twenty-second to the forty-second year of his reign, and the tribute
which he received in this period. In this enumeration sixteen or
seventeen campaigns are mentioned. In the twenty-third year the king
marched against the Retennu (Syrians). From Kazatu (Gaza) beyond Taanaka
(Taanach) he reached Maketi (Megiddo). Here, on the twenty-ninth of the
month Pachor he defeated his enemies. The conflict was not sanguinary.
Only eighty-three of the enemy were slain. The king made 340 prisoners,
but took at the same time 924 chariots and 2,132 horses. Megiddo
surrendered, and Tuthmosis was able to lead back 2,500 prisoners into
Egypt. After this 117 cities and places in Syria surrendered, Kadeschu
(Kades), Tevekhu (Tibshath on the Orontes), Maram (Merom), Tamesku
(Damascus), Atara (Ataroth), Hamtu (perhaps Hamath), Kaanu (Kanah),
Masaar (Misheal), Astartu (Astaroth Karnaim), Hutar (Hazor), Kennarut
(Kinneroth), Aksap (Achshaph), Bar Semas (Beth Shemesh), Atuma (Adamah),
Ranama (Rimmon), Japu (Joppa), Harar (Har El), Rabbau (Rabbah), Baratu
(Berothai, Berytus), Sarta, &c.[187] Thus the coast of Syria and the
mountain district as far as Damascus and Hamath on the Orontes would
have become subject to the Pharaohs. This subjection, however, does not
seem to have gone beyond payment of tribute. The following campaigns of
the king were again for the most part directed against the Retennu; a
battle was fought at Aratu (Aradus). The sums which Tuthmosis received
in tribute from the Cheta (Hittites) are enumerated. Afterwards the king
made repeated expeditions against Naharina (Arem Naharaim), _i.e._
against the land of the two rivers, Mesopotamia, and here also he levied
tribute. Then the tribute is given in the list, which the king received
from the Punt (the Arabians). That Lower Nubia, as far as the old
boundary at Semne, was subject to Tuthmosis III. is beyond a doubt. An
inscription found at Ellesieh in Nubia informs us that Nahi, the
governor of Nubia, has sent the tribute of the lands of the south to the
king in gold, ebony, and ivory,[188] and the list quoted mentions 115
tribes or places subdued by Tuthmosis in the south of Egypt.[189] Of
Amenophis II., the successor of Tuthmosis III. (1565-1555 B.C.),
inscriptions at Amada in Nubia declare that he fought against the
Retennu (Syrians), and slew seven kings, and that in the south he
forced his way as far as Napata, _i.e._ up the Nile as far as Mount
Barkal.[190]

His successor, Tuthmosis IV., appears on monuments of the island
Konosso, near Philæ, as victorious over the negroes.[191] And after him
Amenophis III. (1524-1488 B.C.) again directed his arms in his first
campaign against the negroes; a memorial stone at Semne tells us that he
traversed Abha, the land of the negroes. That the power of Amenophis
III. extended to the south far beyond Semne is proved by the ruins of a
temple which he built at Soleb on the Nile, "to his image living upon
earth," _i.e._ to the copy or manifestation of his divine nature, his
own divinity,[192] and inscriptions on certain scarabæi assure us that
Amenophis ruled from Naharina, _i.e._ Mesopotamia, to the land of Karu
in the south.[193]

Thebes was the point from which the liberation of the land began. Here
the new dynasty who had restored the kingdom, driven out the enemy, and
carried the arms of Egypt far to the south and east, took up their
lasting abode, and this city became the brilliant centre of the new
kingdom. Here, also, the new Pharaohs glorified themselves by mighty
works, as the old kings had done in the city of Memphis and the
burial-place adjacent. And along with the warlike vigour displayed by
the people, the art and civilisation of Egypt, under the series of kings
extending from Amosis to Amenophis III. (1684-1488 B.C.), reached the
highest perfection which the position and character of the nation
permitted.

On the right bank of the Nile, on a terrace near the modern village of
Karnak, the first Sesurtesen (2371-2325 B.C.), built a temple of
moderate size to Ammon (p. 102). To this Tuthmosis I. (1646-1625 B.C.)
added a splendid gateway, a lofty gate between two broad wings, which
rise in the form of truncated pyramids, and behind this gateway he built
an oblong court, encircled by a portico supported on pillars. Against
these pillars leaned karyatids, images of Osiris, with the hands, in
which is the cross with handles, crossed upon the breast. Of these four
remain still uninjured. Before the entrance of the gateway he erected
two obelisks of red granite, of which one, sixty-nine feet in height, is
still standing. The inscription runs thus:--"The mighty Horus, the
friend of truth, the king Tutmes, the mighty sun, which is given to the
world, whom Ammon establishes, has erected this firm structure in honour
of his father Ammon Ra, the protector of the world, and has placed two
large obelisks before the double gates."[194] The queen Misphra
(Ramake), who was regent for Tuthmosis II., and in the early years of
Tuthmosis III. (1625-1591 B.C.), erected in the oblong court of
Tuthmosis I. the two second largest obelisks known. Of these also one is
still uninjured, and stands ninety feet high, the other has fallen, and
lies on the ground. The inscription tells us that the queen whom Ammon
himself had placed on the throne and chosen as the protectress of Egypt,
had resolved in her heart to erect two great obelisks, the tops of which
should reach to heaven, in honour of the god Ammon and in remembrance of
her father Tuthmosis I., in order that her name might continue in the
temple of Ammon for ever and ever. Each obelisk was to be of a single
stone of red granite. Her holiness had commenced the work in her
fifteenth year, and completed it in her sixteenth, seven months after
the work was commenced in the mountain quarry.[195]

To this court Tuthmosis III. added a gateway towards the south, and
surrounded the ancient sanctuary of Sesurtesen with a circle of huge
buildings. These consisted of two halls, each of twelve pillars, to the
right and left of the entrance, on which abut chambers, great or small
as the walls which surround the old temple allow. On the walls which
close these halls and chambers towards the old building, the king
recorded the events of his reign from the twenty-second to the
forty-second year, from which everything has already been given which up
to this time can be regarded as certain. The two largest obelisks also,
of which the largest is now standing in Rome before the Lateran, and the
other is destroyed, were erected by Tuthmosis III., and placed, as it
would seem, before the entrance into the old temple of Sesurtesen. The
obelisk now at Constantinople is also a work of this prince. The
inscription says that Tuthmosis III. "extended his dominion from Mount
Apta (in the south) to the uttermost habitations of Mesopotamia."[196]
On the east side of the enlarged temple of Sesurtesen, he built a
splendid hall, the roof of which is supported by fifty-six pillars.
Besides this he built additions to the temple of Ra at Heliopolis,
restored the temple at Dendera, apparently after a plan sketched on a
goatskin, which, belonging to the time of Chufu (p. 94) was rediscovered
under king Phiops (p. 101),[197] and finally he erected shrines to the
sun-god Mentu at Hermonthis, near Thebes, the god Sebek at Ombos, Chnum
at Letopolis (Esneh), and on the island of Elephantine. In Nubia he
erected temples at Pselchis, Korte, Amada, and Semne. The temple at
Semne he consecrated to Chnum and Sesurtesen III., who extended the
borders of Egypt to this point (p. 105), in order that "the king might
live again in this memorial."[198]

Before the great sphinx, near the second pyramid, Tuthmosis IV. erected
the memorial stone already mentioned (p. 94); it represents the king
worshipping the sphinx. In the inscription the sphinx addresses the
king, and says, "I, thy father Harmachu, give thee the dominion, the
world in all its length and breadth, rich tribute from all nations, and
a long life of many years."[199]

The buildings of Amenophis III. are not inferior to those of Tuthmosis
III. in extent or magnificence. Half an hour southward of the gateways,
court, and porticoes of the temple at Karnak, close on the right bank of
the Nile, at the modern village of Luxor, Amenophis built a second
temple to Ammon, the god of Thebes. In a court surrounded by colonnades,
the "court of sacrifice" joined the antechamber of the temple, or outer
temple, then came the temple with the Holy of Holies, built in the form
invariably used in Egypt after the restoration.[200] Only the spacious
antechamber, a hall with a roof supported on pillars and lighted by
windows in the wall, or by the spaces between the front pillars, could
be entered by laymen. The inner temple, reserved for the priests, to
which a second gate led from the antechamber, was a smaller hall of the
same kind, which received only a moderate light through openings made
high up in the side walls. From this half-darkened room the Holy of
Holies was again separated by a court, and the entrance was through a
door. Two other doors led by means of a passage running round the Holy
of Holies into the chamber surrounding it. The Holy of Holies, together
with the chambers abutting upon it, was surrounded by a high wall and
formed a separate temple of small dimensions. The masonry is heavy, and
narrows toward the top. Here in the gloom dwelt the hidden spirit of the
god. The heavy, solemn, mysterious character of the Egyptian temple
naturally makes itself most strongly felt in these spaces or rooms. On
the inner walls of the temple the sacrifices and worship rendered by the
king are represented, on the outer walls we see his achievements in war.
What still remains of the building of Amenophis--and it was subsequently
enlarged--allows us only to conjecture upon the original plan. Yet about
200 pillars and shafts still rise out of the ruins. The reliefs on the
outer walls of the temple, and in the chambers round the Holy of Holies,
are in the best state of preservation. On the walls of one of these
chambers we see the scribe of heaven, Thoth, announcing to Mutemua, the
mother of Amenophis, the birth of her son. Then the ram-god and the
goddess Hathor lead the queen into the lying-in chamber; another goddess
supports the queen during the birth. Then four heavenly spirits, the two
spirits of the south and the two spirits of the north, carry Amenophis,
already grown into a youth, to a throne in the presence of Ammon Ra, who
anoints him king. Then the gods promise gifts, honour, and power to the
new king. They declare that the Retennu, the "nine nations," _i.e._ the
nations bordering on Egypt, and all people, shall be subject to
him.[201]

Far fewer--not more than a great heap of ruins with a few pillars and
memorial stones--are the remains of a second great work of Amenophis
III., which he built opposite the temple of Karnak on the west bank of
the Nile not far from the modern village of Medinet Habu. We learn
from Pliny that it was a temple of Serapis, _i.e._ of Osarhapi,
Osiris-Apis.[202] We have already mentioned the shrine of the same
goddess, which was situated among the tombs near Memphis (p. 67),
and we know that in the view of the Egyptians the west belonged to the
setting sun, the sun of the under world. The statement of Pliny is also
confirmed by two memorial stones among the ruins, from which we gather
that Osiris and Ammon Ra were the lords of the temple; and it is not
strange that the tutelary god of Thebes should be associated with
Osiris. Before the entrance to this sanctuary Amenophis caused two
statues to be erected, which still rise like steep cliffs above the flat
level of the bank by the side of a palm forest. They are two seated
figures, and the inscriptions tell us that both represent Amenophis.
The king is in a quiet attitude, the hands rest on the knees. The front
parts of the throne are formed by statues of the mother and wife of
Amenophis, which reach up to the knees of the king. The statues were
chiselled out of a single block, as also the bases. The height of the
whole is towards sixty feet.[203]

The power to which Tuthmosis III. and Amenophis III. exalted Egypt
appears to have declined under their successors, or at least it did not
advance. The monuments prove to us that Amenophis IV. (1488-1476 B.C.)
began certain religious innovations. He paid excessive or exclusive
reverence to the sun-god, and attempted to found a new capital in the
neighbourhood of the modern Amarna, in Central Egypt, which was no doubt
intended to be the centre of the new cult. If, at the same time, as the
monuments show, he was able, like his predecessor, to build at Soleb, in
Dongola, it follows that the supremacy of Egypt was maintained, at any
rate in the south.

FOOTNOTES:

[179] Joseph. c. Apion 1, 14; cf. 1, 26; Afric. et Euseb. ap. Sync., p.
61, 62; Schol. Plat. 2, 424, ed. Bekker.

[180] Caussin de Perceval, "Hist. des Arab." 1, 13, 19. That the
tradition of the Arabs about the Amalika is worthless has been proved by
Nöldeke ("Ueber die Amalekiter").

[181] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 77.

[182] Ebers, _loc. cit._ s. 88, 202; Mariette, "Revue archéol." 1861, p.
337 ff.; 1862, p. 300 ff. From a memorial-stone discovered at Tanis we
find that 400 years before a certain year, which is not named, in the
reign of Ramses II. _i.e._, about 1750 B.C. (according to Lepsius's data
for Ramses II.), the shepherd king Nubti held sway; that he introduced
certain regulations in Egypt for the province of Tanis, the special home
of the shepherds; and that Ramses II. when erecting his buildings, which
in any case were sufficiently durable, at Tanis (see below), referred
back to this king. Further conclusions, which have been deduced from the
inscription on this stone, have been completely overthrown in my opinion
by Mariette.--"Revue archéol." 1865, 11, 169 ff.

[183] De Rougé, "Athén. Franç." 1854, p. 532; Brugsch, in the "Zeitschr.
d. d. M. G." 9, 200 ff.; "Hist. d'Eg." p. 78. Brugsch assumes that Ra
Apepi was a later Apophis, and not the Apophis who is the fourth
shepherd king in Josephus, and sixth in Africanus, for according to the
inscription on the tomb of Aahmes, Amosis followed Raskenen. On the
inscription Apepi on a colossus of Ramses II., cf. _infra._

[184] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 85.

[185] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp. 80-90.

[186] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 81, 87; De Rougé, "Revue archéolog."
1860, 2, 310 ff.

[187] De Rougé, "Divers Monuments de Tutmes;" "Revue archéol." 1861, 4,
196 ff. 344 ff.

[188] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 107.

[189] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1861, 1, 345.

[190] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 111.

[191] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 114.

[192] Lepsius, "Briefe aus Ægypten," s. 216; Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p.
118.

[193] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 114.

[194] Rosellini, "Monumenti Storici," 3, 1, 29, 114 ff.

[195] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp. 92, 93: cf. Rosellini, "Monumenti
Storici," 3, 1, 332, 146, and Lepsius, "Königsbuch," s. 38.

[196] Brugsch, _loc cit._ pp. 108, 109.

[197] Dümichen, "Bauurkunde von Dendera;" Chabas in "Zeitschr. für
ægypt. Sprache," 1865, s. 91 ff.

[198] Lepsius, "Briefe aus Ægypten," s. 113; Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte,"
pp. 65, 66.

[199] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 113.

[200] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1865, 11, 354 ff.; Dümichen,
"Bauurkunde von Edfu;" Brugsch, "Bau und Masse des Tempels von Edfu;"
"Zeitschr. für ægypt. Sprache," 1870, s. 153 ff; 1871, s. 25, 32 ff.

[201] Champollion, "Lettres," p. 210; Rosell. M. St. 1, 219, 223, 236,
248.

[202] "Hist. Nat." 35, 11.

[203] Rosell. _loc. cit._ 3, 1, 216. The Greeks regarded the northern
colossus as the statue of Memnon. The ruins of this temple, and other
buildings on the west bank of the Nile, were called by them
"Memnoneia."--Diod. 1, 47; Strabo, pp. 813, 816. The name is strictly
limited to the temples and palaces on the west bank. Yet even the
fortress of Susa is called "the Memnonia."--Herod. 5, 53, 7, 151;
Strabo, p. 728; Diod. 2, 22; Paus. 10, 31. The name as applied to the
Egyptian monuments may be a corruption of Amenophis, so that the name of
the buildings of Amenophis has given the analogy for other similar
structures. Still, it is more probable that the connection of these
buildings with the divinity of the under world, and the death of Osiris,
to which the death of Memnon was compared, is at the root of this
nomenclature of the Greeks. The story of the Ethiopian Memnon, the son
of the Morning, _i.e._ of the East, who came to aid the Trojans and
found an early death before Troy, is known to the Odyssey (11, 522, 4,
187), the Homeric hymns ("In Ven." 219-239) and the Theogony (l. 984),
and was treated in detail by Arktinus of Miletus about 750 B.C. In
Homer's view the Ethiopians dwell in the far East, at the rising of the
sun, beyond the Amazons, whose abode was on the Thermodon. Hence the
ancient Susa, far in the East, the subsequent capital of the Achæmenids,
might have been the dwelling of the son of the East. When it was known
that the Ethiopians inhabited the Upper Nile, and the name Memnon was
found in Egypt, the Greeks, after the time of Herodotus, began to search
for the Homeric Ethiopians and Memnon, in and above Egypt. That the name
is given to the northern colossus only is due to the following reasons.
In the year 27 B.C. an earthquake broke this northern colossus and threw
the upper parts to the ground. Then the pedestal and trunk occasionally
gave forth a metallic sound at sunrise.--Tac. "Annal." 2, 61. This, in
the poetic minds of the Greeks, was the greeting of the son to his
divine mother, the Morning, while she in her sorrow for the early death
of her son moistened the statue every morning with tears of dew. Greek
inscriptions on the pedestal from the time of Nero give the names of
witnesses who had heard the sound. Pausanias, who was of this date,
tells us, _loc. cit._--"At Thebes, in Egypt, is the sounding statue of a
seated man, whom most authorities call Memnon, and say that he forced
his way from Ethiopia to Egypt and Susa. The inhabitants of Thebes,
however, deny that it is Memnon. They regard it as the statue of
Phamenoph, a native Egyptian." Ph-Amenoph is Amenophis with the Egyptian
article. The sounding statue was long regarded as a fable, until the
_savans_ of the French expedition, in the early morning, when the hot
sunbeams followed on the cool of the night, as is usual in the climate
of Africa, perceived in the great Egyptian buildings a small whispering,
or singing tone, which must be due to those physical influences. This
phenomenon may have been especially striking in the mutilated statue of
Amenophis. In the time of Septimius Severus, when the colossus was
restored--the upper parts are now composed of four pieces--the
inscriptions and the marvel came to an end. The new weight placed upon
the pedestal appears to have checked the vibrations. At present no sound
is heard.--Letronne, "La Statue vocal de Memnon."




CHAPTER VI.

THE HOUSE OF RAMSES.


The Greeks inform us that Sesostris, or Sesosis, was the greatest
warrior among the kings of Egypt. Herodotus was told by the priests that
he was the first who set out with ships of war from the Arabian Gulf,
and reduced the dwellers by the Red Sea, until he was checked by waters
which were too shallow for navigation. On his return from this
expedition, Sesostris, as the priests said, gathered together a great
army, invaded the continent, and reduced every nation in his path. In
the conquered lands he set up pillars, on which were inscribed his name
and country, and that he had reduced the nation by his power. Wherever
he found but little resistance he also caused female emblems to be
engraved on the pillars. "So he passed from Asia into Europe, and
reduced the Scythians and Thracians. Beyond these the Egyptian army did
not, in my opinion, pass; for in the country of the Thracians the
pillars of Sesostris are found, but not farther. The greater number of
these pillars are no longer in existence; yet in Syrian Palestine I have
myself seen them with the inscriptions and emblems. In Ionia also there
are two images of this king hewn in the rock, one on the way from
Ephesus to Phocæa, the other on the way from Sardis to Smyrna. At both
places there is the figure of a man, 4-1/2 cubits high, with a spear in
the right hand and a bow in the left, armed partly as an Egyptian and
partly as an Ethiopian. Across the breast, from one shoulder to the
other, run Egyptian sacred letters, saying: 'I have conquered this land
with my arms.' Who he is and from whence he comes, Sesostris does not
tell us here, but on the other pillars. When Sesostris returned, he
brought with him many prisoners from the tribes, and his brother, to
whom Sesostris had entrusted Egypt, gave him a hospitable reception at
Pelusium. But round the house in which Sesostris was with his wife and
children he caused wood to be heaped, and set on fire. Then the queen
cried out to Sesostris to take two of her six sons, throw them on the
burning wood, and pass over their bodies as over a bridge. This was
done. The two sons were burnt, but the others with their father escaped.
After taking revenge on his brother, Sesostris employed the masses of
prisoners in drawing enormous stones to the temple of Hephæstus, and in
digging all the canals which now intersect Egypt. By these the land,
hitherto an open field for chariots and horses, was made less
accessible. The king's object in making them was that the cities which
were not on the river should have more water at the time when the floods
were not out. Then Sesostris is said to have divided the arable land of
Egypt into equal rectangular portions, and to have allotted to every man
an equal portion. And if the inundation washed away any part of this
allotment, the king returned the owner a corresponding part of his tax.
Sesostris was the only king of Egypt who also ruled over Ethiopia. As a
memorial of his reign, he left six large statues before the temple of
Hephæstus--images of himself, his wife, and his four sons; the two
first are thirty, the four last twenty cubits high. Long after, when
Darius wished to place his own statue in front of these, the priest of
Hephæstus forbade him, because Darius had not achieved such mighty deeds
as Sesostris. He had reduced the Scythians, whom Darius had failed to
reduce. This indignity, they say, Darius pardoned."[204]

Diodorus assures us that Sesostris had surpassed the greatest and most
glorious deeds of his predecessors. "But inasmuch as not only the Greek
writers are far from agreeing in their accounts of this king, but even
the Egyptian priests, and those who sing of his deeds are at variance,
we shall attempt to give the most probable account and that which is
most in agreement with the monuments still existing in Egypt." When
Sesosis was born, his father gathered together all the boys born on the
same day, more than 1700 in number, and caused them to be brought up in
the same manner as his own son, in the impression that they would thus
become his most loyal and bravest comrades in battle. With these
companions he first despatched him against the Arabs, and Sesosis
subjugated the whole country of the Arabs, which no one had ever
subjugated before. In the next place, his father sent him against the
tribes in the west, and Sesosis, although still quite young, subjugated
a great part of Libya. On the death of his father, Sesosis, relying on
the results of previous campaigns, formed the resolution of subjugating
the whole earth. Having gained the good will of the Egyptians by
gentleness, remission of punishments, and presents, he gathered together
a great army of the mightiest men, an army of 600,000 infantry, 24,000
cavalry, and 27,000 chariots. The various divisions of this great host
he placed under the command of those who had been educated with him, to
whom at the same time he allotted the most fruitful lands in Egypt. With
this host Sesosis first reduced the Ethiopians, who dwelt in the south,
and imposed upon them a tribute of gold, ebony, and ivory. Then he sent
a fleet of four hundred ships into the Red Sea--he was the first
Egyptian to build ships of war--and by means of these he subjugated to
his dominion all the islands and sea-coasts, as far as India. Meanwhile
he marched out in person with his army, and reduced the whole of Asia.
He crossed the Ganges and passed through India to the ocean. Then he
subjugated the nations of Scythia as far as the Tanais, which divides
Europe and Asia. In the same manner he reduced the rest of Asia, and
then passed into Europe. But in Thrace he was in great danger of losing
his army through want of food and the severity of the climate. So he put
an end to the campaign in Thrace, after erecting pillars at many places
in the countries he had subjugated. On these was engraved, in the
character which the Egyptians called sacred, the following
inscription:--"This land Sesosis, the king of kings and lord of lords,
conquered with his arms." At some places also he set up his own statue
in stone, with a bow and lance, four cubits and four hands high, for
this was his own height. After completing these campaigns in nine years,
Sesosis returned with his prisoners and untold spoil. When at Pelusium,
his brother formed a plan for his destruction. He invited Sesosis to a
banquet, and in the night, when all were asleep after their wine, he
heaped up reeds round the king's tent and set them on fire. When the
flames suddenly sprang up, the retinue, heavy with wine, could render
little service, but Sesosis lifted up his hands and besought the gods
to save his wife and children, and with them he happily escaped from the
flames. In gratitude for this rescue he honoured the gods with
dedicatory statues, more especially the god Hephæstus, as it was by him
that he was saved. In his temple at Memphis he placed statues of himself
and his wife, monoliths of thirty cubits high, and also statues of his
four sons, twenty cubits in height. The princes whom he placed over the
conquered nations, or allowed to retain their thrones, came with
presents to Egypt at the appointed time. Sesosis received them with
honour and distinction. But whenever he went into a temple or a city he
caused his horses to be unyoked from his chariot, and in their place the
princes and rulers were yoked four abreast, in order to show to all that
he was the mightiest and had conquered the bravest, so that no one was
his equal in valour. Having ended his wars, Sesosis began to erect great
works for his own glory and the security of Egypt. In every city he
erected a temple to the divinity chiefly worshipped there. On these
works no Egyptian was employed; they were entirely completed by his
prisoners. Moreover, for the cities which lay too low Sesosis caused
many large dams to be made, to which he transferred the cities, so that
they were secure from the inundations of the Nile. From Memphis
downwards he carried a number of canals through the whole land, partly
to facilitate commerce, partly to make invasion more difficult to the
enemy. Up to this time the best part of Egypt was an open field for the
movements of cavalry and chariots; after this it became almost
impassable, owing to the number of canals. In addition the king built a
wall 1,500 stades in length, from Pelusium to Heliopolis, as a security
against inroads from Syria and Arabia. To the god held in chief honour
at the city of Thebes he presented a ship of cedar wood, 280 cubits in
length, of which the visible part was overlaid on the inside with silver
and on the outside with gold, and in his honour he also erected two
obelisks of hard stone, 120 cubits high, on which he caused to be
inscribed the greatness of his power, the number of the subjugated
nations, and the amount of his income. When he had reigned thirty-three
years his eyesight began to fail, and he voluntarily put an end to his
own life. Many generations after, when Darius wished to set up his own
image in front of Sesosis, the high priest forbade him in the assembly
of priests, and explained that Darius had not surpassed the deeds of
Sesosis. So far from being enraged, Darius was pleased at his freedom,
and said that he would henceforth make it his object, should an equal
length of life be given him, to fall below Sesosis in no respect.[205]

Strabo says: Sesostris appears first of all to have conquered the land
of the Ethiopians and Troglodytes; on the coast of the Arabian Gulf,
between the harbour of the Protectress and the Elephant-hunt, there
stood on a hill a temple built by Sesostris in honour of Isis. He
succeeded in reaching the land of cinnamon, where pillars and
inscriptions are shown as monuments of his campaign. Then he crossed
over to Arabia, and it is said that in the narrow part of Ethiopia
towards Arabia, on the promontory of Dirê, there was a pillar giving an
account of his crossing. From Arabia he went on to invade the whole of
Asia, and even forced his way into Europe. In many places ramparts and
temples of the Egyptian style are shown as the work of Sesostris. In
Egypt he undertook the construction of a canal from the Nile into the
Arabian Gulf and the Red Sea.[206]

When Germanicus, the son of Drusus, travelled in Egypt, he saw large
remains of ancient Thebes. On the mighty walls, so Tacitus continues,
the Egyptian inscriptions still remained, telling of their former
magnificence. One of the older priests was bidden to translate the
Egyptian inscriptions, and he informed them that once there had been
700,000 men of military age in the kingdom, and with this army Ramses
had subjugated Libya and Ethiopia, the Medes, Persians, Bactrians, and
Scythians, and in addition to these had ruled over the lands from the
Bithynian to the Lycian Seas, which are inhabited by the Syrians, the
Armenians, and their neighbours, the Cappadocians. The amount of tribute
also imposed upon the nations was read, the weight of silver and gold,
the number of weapons and horses, the presents of ivory and frankincense
for the temples, and how much each nation had to contribute in corn and
goods--an amount no less than that which is now imposed by the power of
the Parthians or the Romans.[207]

Josephus, on the authority of Manetho's Egyptian History, tells us that
Sethosis, who was called Ramesses, possessed a great force in cavalry
and ships. After leaving his brother Armais as governor of Egypt, and
placing the royal power in his hands,--with the restrictions that he was
not to wear the crown, or do any injury to the queen-mother and her
children, or approach the king's concubines,--he marched against Cyprus
and the Phenicians, and afterwards against the Assyrians and the Medes,
and subjugated them all, some by his arms, others by the fear of his
great power. Fired with ambition by these successes, he pressed boldly
onward to reduce the cities and lands of the east. Thus his absence was
prolonged, and his brother Armais, without the least shame, disregarded
all the restrictions laid upon him. He violated the queen, lay with the
concubines of the king, allowed himself to be persuaded by his friends
into wearing the crown, and rebelled against his brother. But the person
who was in authority over the sanctuaries of Egypt wrote to the king and
disclosed all that his brother had done against him. Sethosis at once
turned back to Pelusium, and established himself again in possession of
the dominion which belonged to him.[208]

Thus, according to the accounts of Tacitus and Josephus, the warrior
whom Herodotus, Diodorus, and Strabo call Sesostris or Sesosis, was
known to the Egyptians as Ramses, Ramesses, or Sethosis. Let us now
inquire whether the monuments present us with princes and achievements
which confirm the narratives of the Greeks, the account of Manetho, and
the evidence of Tacitus. According to these it may be assumed that Horus
(Hor, 1455-1443 B.C.) whom the sculptures of a temple hewn in the rock
in the valley of the Nile at Selseleh represent as a conqueror over the
negroes,[209] was succeeded by Ramses I. (1443-1439 B.C.) who was
followed by Sethos I. (1439-1388 B.C.). Of him we are told in the
inscriptions on the outer wall of the great colonnade which he erected
at Karnak (p. 169) that in the first year of his reign he had attacked
the Schasu, from the fortress of Tar as far as Kanana;[210] his holiness
had startled them like a lion, and made a great slaughter. On a mountain
fortress to which the defeated enemy fled is read, "Fortress of the
land of Kanana (Canaan)." After this there were expeditions against the
Schasu, and the tribute which they paid to Sethos is mentioned. The
Schasu are the nomad tribes in the desert between Egypt and Canaan,
which had previously conquered and ruled over Egypt. The inscriptions
also remark that Sethos had twice desolated the land of Cheta with fire,
and had taken Kadeshu (Kades).[211] The Cheta are the Chittim, or
Hittites, who possessed the south of Canaan. Then the sculptures
represent the victory of the king over the Retennu, _i.e._ over the
tribes of Syria, and inscriptions celebrate the victories which Sethos
had gained over the "nine nations,"[212] _i.e._ over all the nations
bordering on Egypt. On the Upper Nile also Sethos had fought and
established his dominion, as is proved by the ruins of a temple on Mount
Sese in Dongola above the buildings of Amenophis II. and III. at
Soleb.[213] The representations of the achievements of Sethos at Karnak
are brought to a close by the victorious return of the king with
"innumerable" prisoners and rich booty, and by two enormous figures of
the king, in each of which he is holding nine prisoners. The list of the
conquered nations first mentions the tribes of Cush, _i.e._ of the
south; then follow the Schasu, the Cheta, and Naharina (the inhabitants
of Mesopotamia), and last of all the "Punt," _i.e._ the tribes of
Arabia. These names are followed by the observation;--"This is the list
of the nations of the south and the north, which his holiness has
subdued: the number of prisoners conveyed into the temple of Ammon Ra
cannot be given."[214] From these monuments we gather that Sethos
carried on a number of successful campaigns which begin with battles
against the nomad tribes on the eastern borders of Egypt, then extend to
the south and north of Syria, and finally to Mesopotamia, while in the
other direction he reduced the tribes of Arabia, and carried the sway of
Egypt beyond Dongola, farther to the south than before.

Sethos was followed by his son Ramses II. (1388-1322 B.C.).[215] We
learnt from Herodotus that Sesostris had set up pillars in the conquered
lands in remembrance of his campaigns: in Syrian Palestine Herodotus had
himself seen such pillars, and in Ionia there were two figures of this
king hewn in the rock. As a fact a rock half way between Smyrna and
Sardis to this day presents a relief of an armed warrior. In style and
attitude it is certainly not Egyptian, and therefore cannot have been
the work of a Pharaoh. On the other hand, the rocks on the Phenician
coast which run into the sea at the mouth of the Nahr-el-Kelb, near the
ancient Berytus, the modern Beyrout, have Egyptian sculptures upon them.
These are three figures of Ramses II. In one he is carrying an enemy
into the presence of Ammon. In the two others he is striking down an
enemy before the gods Ptah and Ra. Though to a great extent destroyed,
the inscriptions still show that the achievements, of which these
sculptures are intended to immortalise the memory, belonged to the
second and fourth year of Ramses II. His arms had therefore reached the
coast of Phenicia, northward of Tyre and Sidon, and he maintained his
ground so far or so long, that he could set up this memorial of his
victory. In the ruins of a temple built or restored by Ramses at Tanis
(San), we find an inscription which ascribes to him the subjugation of
the land of Kaft, _i.e._ of Phenicia, of Nebinai, which is explained to
be Cyprus, and lastly of the Upper Retennu, _i.e._ of eastern
Syria.[216] Inscriptions on the building of Ramses II. at Karnak, near
Medinet Habu (the so-called Ramesseum), and in his rock temple at Abu
Simbel in Nubia, inform us that he again fought in Syria in the fifth
year of his reign. Eighteen nations, tribes, or cities are mentioned
which were opposed to the Egyptians. Here, also, the Cheta, _i.e._ the
Hittites, are first mentioned, then the Karkisa (perhaps the
Girgasites),[217] Kadeshu (Kades, either Kadesh Barnea in the south, or
Kadesh in the north of Canaan), Aratu (Aradus), Chirbu (perhaps Chelbon,
Aleppo), Kirkamisha (Karchemish), and Naharina (Mesopotamia). At Kadesh
Ramses was victorious and thence he returned to Egypt.[218] In the
eighth year of his reign he was again in Canaan. He took Maram (Merom),
Dapurr (perhaps Debir), in the land of the Amari (Amorites), and
Salam,[219] and on the walls of the Ramesseum, as also on a large
memorial stone in the ruins of Karnak, there is a treaty of the
twenty-first year of Ramses II., between "Ramses, the son of the great
prince Sethos the brave, the son of the great prince Ramses I." and
"Chetasar (_i.e._, the prince of the Cheta), son of the great prince
Maursar the brave, son of the great prince Sepalulu." It is concluded
"on good terms for eternal peace and friendship, that this may be a
beginning for all eternity according to the intention of the great king
of Egypt." After reference to former treaties, the great king of the
Cheta pledges himself never to invade Egypt to inflict injury, and a
similar promise is made by Ramses. Both kings are to send back those of
their subjects who wish to take service with the other. Either is to
help the other when attacked by enemies. The treaty is ratified by oaths
on either side; and Sutech (Baal) appears as the tutelary god of the
Cheta.[220]

Such is the information we can gain from monuments of the achievements
of Ramses II. in Syria. His campaigns in the south appear to have been
attended by more important results. Sculptures in the temple at Abu
Simbel display the king sitting on his chariot, and leading back as
prisoners red figures, which here are probably Nubians, and negroes with
ropes round their necks: both tribes have no other garments but the
skins of wild animals. In another temple hewn in the rock of the western
bank at Beth-el-Walli, a little above Syene, we see Ramses II. standing
alone upon his war chariot, rushing with drawn bow on a crowd of
negroes, who are armed with very long bows, but clothed only with skins.
They fall before the horses of the king. Thus defeated, they fly to
their villages, which lie in a valley shadowed by cocoa-palms, in the
tops of which apes are climbing. Women and children come forth in
distress to meet the fugitives. The prisoners and the booty are brought
before the king, chieftains in fetters, and negroes carrying elephants'
tusks and ebony; others lead lions, panthers, antelopes, gazelles,
ostriches, and a giraffe, the animal of Central Africa.[221] Besides
this Ramses II. founded the furthest monument of Egyptian dominion up
the stream of the Nile, so that he must have ruled further to the south
than his father Sethos. Beyond Soleb, under the steep spur of Mount
Barkal, 400 miles or more above Syene, lie the ruins of a temple which
Ramses built in honour of Ammon.[222] Symbolical representations of the
temple already mentioned at Abu Simbel on the right and left of the
entrance collect all the victories which Ramses won. Before the god
Ammon, who hands to the king the scythe of battle, Ramses is brandishing
his club upon a crowd of kneeling enemies, whom he has seized by the
forelock. Among these are three negroes, three red and beardless men,
and four forms which are yellow and bearded. Ammon speaks thus: "I give
thee the scythe, slay with it; I give thee the south for subjection, and
the north for conquest, and to put to flight all the tribes of the
perverse nations, and to extend the fabric of thy dominion to the
pillars of the sky."[223]

On this evidence we find that the narratives of the Greeks of the deeds
of Sesostris, with whom tradition has amalgamated Sethos and Ramses II.,
and also Manetho's account of the exploits of Ramses, and what the
priest read about them to Germanicus at Thebes, are all violent
exaggerations. Of the battles in the north-east and in Asia, we find in
the inscriptions only the battles fought by Sethos against the
shepherds, between Egypt and Syria, against the Schasu, against the
Hittites, against the Retennu, and finally a campaign to Mesopotamia, or
at least battles against princes of the Euphrates. Of Ramses II. we find
that he forced his way as far as Berytus in Syria, and fought against
Syrian tribes and cities, with whom Karchemish on the Euphrates, and
other princes of the Euphrates (Naharina) are said to have been united.
Even as early as Tuthmosis I. and III., and Amenophis III., the
inscriptions mention campaigns to Mesopotamia. They tell us that
Tuthmosis III. forced his way into the interior of Mesopotamia, and
enumerate the regions which he compelled to pay tribute. With regard to
Ramses II. the monuments prove no more than that he temporarily reduced
Syria, including the Phenician cities and the island of Cyprus, which
was probably already dependent upon them. The subsequent battles and the
treaty of Ramses II. with the Cheta, prove how slight were the successes
so highly extolled in the inscriptions. If the Hittites were never
reduced to obedience, all the more distant campaigns into Syria, and all
attempts against Mesopotamia had only a momentary result, and could
hardly have been more than mere raids. In the inscriptions, every
Pharaoh, from Amosis onward, is found fighting against the same nations,
the Schasu, the Cheta, the Retennu, the Punt, the Cushites, &c., and
each time we are assured that the "eight" or "nine nations," "the lands
of the north and south," the earth from one end to the other has been
subdued. It is by no means remarkable that the recollections of the
campaigns of the third Tuthmothis and Amenophis, of the achievements of
Sethos, and of Ramses II. and of Ramses III., of which we have still to
speak, supported as they were by the flattery and exaggeration of the
inscriptions, should combine in the tradition of the Egyptians into a
monarch who subdued the whole earth, of whom certain accounts and these,
as Diodorus says, by no means accordant, passed to the Greeks. And
Diodorus observes expressly that these contradictions were not due to
the Greeks, but to the Egyptian priests and those who sang of the
exploits of Sesostris.

As we have seen, this tradition lays especial weight on the achievements
of Sesostris in Ethiopia, in the Red Sea, and in Arabia. Herodotus
tells us that the priests assured him that the king--at first sailing
with ships of war out of the Arabian Gulf--had subjugated the
inhabitants of the Red Sea. He was, they said, the only king who had
ruled at once over Egypt and Ethiopia. In Diodorus we find that he first
reduces the whole of Arabia, which had never before been conquered, and
the greater part of Libya, and the Ethiopians in the south of Egypt.
Afterwards he--first of the Egyptians--built ships of war, and sent them
into the Red Sea, and with these reduced all the coasts and islands as
far as India. In Strabo Sesostris first marches against Ethiopia, forces
his way as far as the land of Cinnamon, then crosses the Straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb, reduces Arabia, and commences the digging of a canal from
the Nile to the Arabian Gulf. The monuments confirm the statement that
Sethos fought with the Punt, _i.e._ the Arabs, that he pushed farther
than his predecessors into the territory of the negroes, and that Ramses
II. (in whose reign the monuments mention governors of Ethiopia)[224]
established a lasting supremacy as far as Mount Barkal.

Thus it is established that the dominion of Egypt under Ramses II.
extended beyond Nubia and Dongola, and reached the territory of the
negroes, while at the same time the tribes of the Arabian peninsula may
have been to a great extent reduced to pay tribute; and from this we may
draw the conclusion that the attention of Sethos and Ramses was mainly
directed to these regions. The products which they could obtain by
tribute or by trade with these tribes--slaves, gold, ebony, ivory,
frankincense, spices, gum--were of great value for Egypt, and ships of
war were needed both to keep in submission the tribes which may have
been subjugated on the coasts of Arabia, and to maintain the trading
stations settled on the east coast of Africa. For the fleet of Ramses
Herodotus refers to the evidence of the priests. Such a fleet is, as a
fact, exhibited on the monuments of Ramses III., and the tradition of
the Hebrews tells us of trading ships which, about the year 1000 B.C.,
sailed from Elath out of the Arabian Sea, and reached the mouth of the
Indus, no doubt on routes the Egyptian trade had already laid down to
the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb and the southern coast of Arabia. In
connection with these efforts, directed towards the establishment of
trade and authority on the Arabian Sea, it seems intelligible that
Sethos and his son Ramses should have entertained the idea of
establishing a water communication between the Nile and this sea, and
should have actually commenced the work. Remains of a canal, beginning
on the Nile at Bubastis, above the city, ran through the valley of
Tumilat, a depression of the Arabian hills towards the east, in the
direction of the Lake of Crocodiles and the Bitter Lakes. On these
remains at Tel-el-Kebir and Abu Kesheb are the ruins of Egyptian
buildings. At the second place an image of Ramses II. has been found,
worshipping Tum and Ammon. We may assume that the ruins at Tel-el-Kebir
are those of the city of Pithom (Patumos, _pa-tum_, _i.e._ habitation of
Tum), which we learn from Herodotus lay on this canal, and those at Abu
Kesheb are the ruins of the city of Ramses (_pa-rameses_), names
preserved to us in the tradition of the Hebrews, and that Sethos and
Ramses II. had built both these cities.[225] The Hebrews, whose
forefathers had broken off from the Edomites, the settlers on Mount
Seir, which runs from the north-east point of the Red Sea to the Dead
Sea, and pastured their flocks on the Pelusiac arm of the Nile under
Egyptian protection, have a tradition that it was they who were
compelled to build Pithom and Ramses for the Pharaoh. The canal remained
unfinished; at that time it apparently reached only to the Lake of
Crocodile. Seven hundred years later Necho carried it as far as the
Bitter Lakes; it was finished by King Darius and the Ptolemies, who
completed what the Pharaohs were unable to carry out.

The tradition of the mighty deeds of Sesostris in Asia contradicts
itself in the most glaring manner, inasmuch as it likewise tells us that
he dug a number of canals from Memphis downwards to the sea, in order to
fortify the land and make the approach difficult for enemies. The
eastern side of Egypt also he fortified against the inroads of Arabians
and Syrians, by building a wall of about 1,500 stades long through the
desert from Pelusium to Heliopolis. And the inscriptions on the building
of Sethos at Karnak are believed to tell us that this prince had erected
"the double walls against the lands of the impure."[226] No line of
fortification was required against the nomads on the eastern border, if
these were sufficiently held in check by the Egyptian arms, or had been
thoroughly subjugated. This great fortification which passed beyond the
protecting arm of the Nile from Bubastis in a slanting direction through
the desert, from the sea to Heliopolis, along a line of about 1,500
stades, may very likely have been connected with the making of the
canal. The trade on the canal would be protected against predatory
attacks, and the territory rescued from the desert by its construction,
and the cities adjacent would be protected. The city which Ramses built
on the canal and named by his own name apparently belonged to those
fortifications. It was a border fortress against the desert and the
attacks of Syrian tribes.

Of Menephta, _i.e._ beloved of Ptah (1322-1302 B.C.), the son and
successor of Ramses II., Josephus, following Manetho, gives us the
following account:--"Like Horus, who had been king before him, Menephta
desired to see the gods. This wish he confided to a wise prophet, the
son of Papius. The prophet told him that he would see the gods if he
cleared the whole land of leprous and unclean persons. Then the king
collected out of Egypt all who were diseased in their bodies, to the
number of 80,000, and threw them into the stone quarries east of the
Nile, that they might labour there along with the other Egyptians
condemned to similar toil. But as among the diseased persons were
certain men of learning and priests who had been attacked by leprosy,
the son of Papius feared the anger of the gods would descend upon
himself and the king if holy men were forced into slavish tasks, and he
foresaw that others would come to the aid of these impure persons, and
rule over Egypt for thirteen years. He did not venture to tell this to
the king, but wrote it down, and then put an end to his own life. Filled
with anxiety, when the lepers had suffered long enough in the stone
quarries, the king gave them Avaris, the city abandoned by the
shepherds, as a refuge and protection. But according to the old
mythology this city belonged to Typho. When the unclean persons came to
Avaris, and were in possession of a centre to support any disaffection,
they chose Osarsiph, one of the priests at Heliopolis, as their leader,
and swore to obey him in everything. The first law he gave them was to
offer prayer to no god, and to abstain from no animal held sacred in
Egypt, but to sacrifice them all and eat them, and to hold communion
with none but those who had taken the oath. After giving these and many
other laws, diametrically opposed to the Egyptian customs, Osarsiph bade
them fortify the city, and arm themselves against Menephta, while he
took counsel with certain priests and infected persons, and sent an
embassy to Jerusalem, to the shepherds driven out by Tuthmosis. He told
them what an outrage had been done to him and his associates, and called
on them to march against Egypt with the same intentions as himself.
Avaris, the city of their forefathers, would first open its gates to
them and give freely whatever they needed, and whenever necessary he
would fight at their head and easily subdue the land for them. Delighted
at the message, the shepherds all set out with eagerness, about 200,000
strong, and were soon in Avaris. When Menephta heard of their approach,
he was seized with alarm, for he bethought him of the prophecy of the
son of Papius. It is true he gathered together about 300,000 of the
flower of the Egyptian army, but when the enemy met him, he would not
join battle, fearing to fight against the gods. After taking counsel
with his officers, he gave orders for the sacred animals, which were
held in especial honour, to be brought to him, and bade the priests
secure the images of the gods with the greatest care; and when he had
placed his son Sethos, now five years old, in security with a friend, he
turned back to Memphis. Then he took Apis and the other sacred animals,
which the priests had brought to Memphis, with him, and retired with his
army and the bulk of the Egyptians to Ethiopia. The king of Ethiopia,
who was under a debt of gratitude to Menephta, received him and the
multitude with him, provided for the Egyptians, and allotted them cities
and villages sufficient to support them for the thirteen years, and
caused the Ethiopian army to keep watch on the borders of Egypt. But the
men of Jerusalem and the unclean invaded Egypt, and displayed such
impious rage against the Egyptians, that to those who witnessed their
wickedness their dominion seemed the worst of all. They were not content
with burning cities and villages, with plundering the sanctuaries, and
destroying the images of the gods, they even compelled the priests and
prophets to sacrifice and strangle the sacred animals, and then they
thrust them naked out of the temples, and ate the animals if at all good
for food. But in time Menephta returned with a great host from Ethiopia,
and his son Ramses also with an army. Both attacked the unclean and the
shepherds, and overcame them. Many they slew, and the rest they pursued
as far as the borders of Syria. It is said that the priest who gave them
their constitution and laws, a native of Heliopolis, and called
Osarsiph, from Osiris, the god worshipped there, changed his name from
Osarsiph to Moses."[227]

From the tradition of the Hebrews we learn that their ancestors, after
pasturing their flocks for a long time, under Egyptian protection, on
the Pelusiac arm of the Nile, in the land of Goshen, became weary of
the task-work imposed upon them, and set forth out of Egypt, in order to
feed their flocks in freedom in the peninsula of Sinai, to the east of
the Dead Sea. The oppression of these shepherds by Egypt may, of course,
be connected with the fortification of the border towards Syria, the
construction of the canal, and the erection of the cities for trade, and
the border fortresses on this canal. Accordingly there seems no reason
to contest the tradition of the Egyptians that the exodus of the Hebrews
took place under Menephta. That the Egyptian tradition regards these
Hebrews as leprous and unclean Egyptians is of no importance. The
cession of Avaris and invitation of the Hyksos is mere imagination,
arising from the somewhat analogous event of former times. The most
improbable fact is the voluntary departure of Menephta to the allied
king of the Ethiopians, and the abandonment of Egypt without a struggle
to her fiercest foe. Under Ramses II., as we have seen, Ethiopia, as far
as Mount Barkal, became an Egyptian province. Far more credible is the
tradition of the Hebrews that the army of the Pharaoh met with a heavy
reverse in the attempt to check the exodus of the Hebrews, and their
union with the hostile tribes of the desert. It is possible that, in
consequence of this disaster, a king was set up in opposition to
Menephta, and that Menephta retired before him to Ethiopia, from whence
he afterwards recovered Egypt. In the excerpt of Eusebius we find, after
the name Menephta, a king Amenemes, and on the monuments Amenemessu,
whose shields, though chiselled out, can still be recognised.[228]

Of all these things the monuments of Menephta know nothing. On the
contrary, a long inscription in the small court, on the southern wall of
the temple at Karnak, tells us of a victory which Menephta had obtained
over the Libyan tribes. These are the Lubu (Libyans), Maschawascha (who
may be explained as the Maxyans, a tribe which, as Herodotus tells us,
dwelt near Lake Triton, on the north coast of Africa), the Kesak, and
from the "regions on the sea," the Tuirscha, Sakalascha, Schardaina,
Akaiwascha, and Leku. They had crossed the western border and forced
their way, not into the land only, but down to the river, and had
pitched their camp in the territory of the city Paali. The king was
obliged to protect the city of Tum and the sanctuary of Ptah Tatamen
(perhaps Memphis). On the first of Epiphi--the year of the reign of
Menephta was not given, or at any rate is not found now--a battle took
place. Of the Lubu 6,359 were slain; of hands belonging to the
Sakalascha 250 were counted, and 790 belonging to the Tuirscha. Fourteen
pairs of horses were taken, belonging to the chief of the Leku and his
sons, and 9,111 swords of the Maschawascha.[229]

Menephta was succeeded by Sethos II. and Menephta II. Then followed
Ramses III. (1269-1244 _B.C._). The warlike exploits which this king has
commemorated on his temple at Medinet Habu appear from the inscriptions
to have been hardly inferior to those of Sethos I. and Ramses II. In the
reliefs of this temple is seen an Egyptian fleet and the engagement
with the ships of the enemy. On a picture on a wall are collected all
the campaigns of the king; the chiefs of the conquered tribes are
represented by fourteen figures, and the accompanying hieroglyphics give
us the names of their tribes. Two of these names are destroyed, and a
third is illegible. The first figure is the chief of the "evil land of
Cush." Two of the figures are negroes, and their tribes are mentioned.
Then follow the lord "of the hostile Schasu," _i.e._ the shepherds of
the Syrian border, the "evil chief of the Cheta," against whom the
inscription observes that he was taken alive, the "evil chief of the
Amari" (Amorites), the sovereign of the Lubu (Libyans), the sovereign of
the Maschawascha, the coast-land Tuirscha, the coast-land Schardaina,
and the "lord of the hostile Zakkarj."[230] The first Menephta, as we
have seen, had been compelled to fight against the Lubu, Maschawascha,
Tuirscha, and Schardaina. The remaining figures prove that Ramses III.
carried on war on the Upper Nile against the Nubians and Negro tribes,
and in the north-east he had to contend with the Schasu, _i.e._ the
descendants of the Hyksos, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the old
enemies against whom his forefathers took the field. To these the
Pulista, _i.e._ the Philistines, who are here mentioned for the first
time, are added in a list of the nations reduced by the king in the
eighth and ninth years of his reign, inscribed on the right wing of the
gateway which leads into the second court of the temple. In the second
court four pictures represent the achievements of the king in the fifth
year of his reign against the Lubu (Libyans), and ten pictures on the
outer side of the north wall give the achievements of the eighth and
ninth years. First there is a great slaughter of the Temhu, apparently
the general name under which the Egyptians comprehended the Libyan
tribes. The enumeration of hands and members gives a total of 12,535 for
each, and the scribe on the picture is taking this down. On the eighth
picture the Egyptian ships, with beaks ending in lions' heads, and
mastheads manned by archers, are manoeuvring with sails and oars to
thrust the enemy's ships upon the shore, on which is drawn up the
Egyptian army with arrows also directed against the hostile ships. The
inscriptions tell us that these are the ships of the Zakkarj. At a
fortress over which is written Magadil (Migdol?) the captive Zakkarj are
brought before the king. This is on the ninth picture; on the tenth the
king celebrates his return to Thebes.[231]

Ramses III. was followed by eleven kings of the same name (1244-1091
_B.C._). But the days of warlike expeditions were over. The inscriptions
which have come down to us from these rulers only prove that their
sovereignty was maintained over Nubia, and tell us of certain buildings
which these princes also erected at Memphis.[232] Of Ramses XII. a
memorial stone found in the temple of the moon-god Chunsu at Karnak--a
deity to whom the house of Ramses paid especial honour--informs us that
he elevated the daughter of the lord of the land of Buchten (or Bachtan)
to be Queen of Egypt. When afterwards another daughter of the chief fell
ill, he besought the king of Egypt for a wise man to cure her. The
priest, whom Ramses sent, found the king's daughter possessed by a
spirit, but he was too weak to contend with it. Then the chief of
Buchten besought Ramses to send him a god to overcome the spirit. And
Ramses sent the image of the god Chunsu from the temple at Thebes in a
large boat, accompanied by five small boats and a chariot. The spirit
gave way before the god, and the chieftain was in great joy, and refused
to allow the god to return to Egypt, until in a dream he saw a golden
hawk, which spread out its wings to fly to Egypt. On awaking he found
himself seized by an illness. So he allowed the god to return to Egypt
after he had kept him three years and nine months, and gave him many
rich presents for the journey.[233]

FOOTNOTES:

[204] Herod. 2, 102-110.

[205] Diod. 1, 53, 58.

[206] Strabo, pp. 38, 686, 769, 770, 790, 804.

[207] Tac. "Annal." 2, 60.

[208] Joseph. "C. Apion." 1, 15; Euseb. "Arm." ed. Aucher, p. 230;
"Sethos qui et Rameses."

[209] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 124.

[210] Ebers, "Ægypten," s. 78.

[211] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 132.

[212] Rosell. "Mon. Stor." 3, 1, 320 ff.

[213] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 136.

[214] Rosell. "Mon. Stor." 3, 1, 315 ff.; Bunsen, "Ægypten," 4, 171;
Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 128 ff.; cf. Brugsch, "Recueil," p. 59.

[215] The lists allow him a reign of 61, 66, or 68 years. According to a
memorial-stone discovered by Mariette at Abydus he reigned 67 years; cf.
p. 160, note 1.

[216] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 373, and "Monatsberichte des Berl. Akad."
1866, s. 294, 297 ff.

[217] Gen. 10, 16; Joshua 24, 11.

[218] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1867, 16, 36.

[219] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ pp. 145, 146.

[220] De Rougé, "Revue archéolog." 1866, 13, 269; Brugsch, "Hist.
d'Egypte," p. 147.

[221] Rosell. "Mon. Stor." 3, 2, 10-12, 24.

[222] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 239.

[223] Rosell. "Mon. Stor." 3, 2, 1, 93, 94.

[224] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 151.

[225] Herod. 2, 158; Aristot. "Metereol." 1. 14; Lepsius, "Chronolog."
s. 349 ff. 357; Ebers ("Durch Gosen," s. 496) finds Pithom in Abu
Soliman.

[226] Rosell. "Mon. Stor." 3, 340 ff.; Ebers ("Ægypten," s. 781),
relying on the Berlin papyrus I., regards the fortification as much
older, and carries it as far as Suez.

[227] Joseph. "c. Apion." 1, 26, 27; Lepsius ("Chronologie," s. 323,
330) has sufficiently proved that we ought to read Menephtes instead of
Amenophis and Menophis. A similar story is in Chæremon, a contemporary
of Aelius Gallus.--Joseph. "c. Apion." 1, 32.

[228] Bunsen, "Ægypten," 4, 211. Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp. 178,
179.

[229] De Rougé, "Revue Archéolog." 1867, 16, 38 ff., 81 ff; Lauth,
"Sitzungsberichte" of the Academy at Munich, 1867, 2, 528 ff. The
explanation of the Tuirscha as Tyrsenians, of the Sakalascha as Sikels,
of the Schardaina as Sardinians, and the Akaiwascha as Achæans, appears
to me very doubtful. The locality points to Libyan tribes. Brugsch
("Hist. d'Egypte," p. 172) reads Qairdina for Schardaina, Qawascha for
Akaiwascha. On the weapons and features of the Schardaina, see Rougé,
_loc. cit._ pp. 90,91.

[230] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte." p. 191.

[231] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 183 ff.

[232] Brugsch, _loc. cit._ p. 203; Mariette, "Ath. Franç." 1855, Oct. p.
86.

[233] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 206.




CHAPTER VII.

THE MONUMENTS OF THE HOUSE OF RAMSES.


More than ten centuries seem to have elapsed from the founding of the
kingdom of Memphis before Egypt ventured beyond her natural borders. The
peninsula of Sinai, the shores of the Red Sea opposite Thebes, and Semne
in Nubia were the extreme limits in the times of the kings who built the
pyramids, of the Sesurtesen and Amenemha. The impulse given by the
successful war of liberation carried Egypt beyond these boundaries. When
Amosis and Tuthmosis III. had restored the kingdom, it reached the
summit of its greatness and splendour under the latter and Amenophis
III., Sethos I., and Ramses II., while Ramses III. strengthened anew and
maintained the position which his great forefathers had obtained for
Egypt. Four centuries of glory and victory had now passed over Egypt
(1650-1250), the victorious arms of the Pharaohs had been carried to
Nubia and Dongola, to the Negroes, to Libya and Syria in repeated
campaigns; more than once the Euphrates had seen the Egyptian armies. In
these centuries Egypt was the first kingdom in the ancient world, not in
civilisation merely, or in art, but in military power, though her
lasting acquisitions were limited to the Upper Nile. For yet another
century and a half the successors of Ramses III. could enjoy undisturbed
the fruits of the exertions of their ancestors.

As the new kingdom surpassed the old in power, so did the new capital
Thebes eclipse the older Memphis. None of these princes neglected to
offer his booty to Ammon of Thebes; from the time of Tuthmosis I. to
Ramses III. no king omitted to adorn Thebes with new buildings. The city
must have presented a most marvellous appearance when the works of the
Tuthmosis and Amenophis, of Sethos, of Ramses II. and III. stood erect
and rose up from the earth solid and massive as rocks on either bank of
the Nile, while the multitude of obelisks and colossi towered up like a
forest of stone. Fancy might imagine that she looked upon a city built
by giants. The houses of the people also, though built of brick only, as
Diodorus tells us, were three or four stories high. Diodorus fixes the
circuit of the city at more than fifteen miles; for us it is still
marked by the remains of the temples of Karnak, Luxor, Gurnah, and
Medinet Habu.[234]

We have spoken above of the buildings erected by Tuthmosis I. and III.
at Karnak, and Amenophis III. at Luxor and Medinet Habu. It was Sethos
I. who on the west of the oblong court, the gateway, and obelisks of
Tuthmosis I. at Karnak, added a hall on the most magnificent scale, the
entrance to which is also formed by a gateway. This hall, the most
splendid monument of Egyptian architecture, is 320 feet long, and over
160 feet broad; the roof rests on 134 pillars, which on each side
towards the north and south form seven naves, each of nine pillars. The
central space, supported on either side by six pillars of 12 feet in
diameter and 68 feet in height, rises higher than the naves at the side.
On the external wall of this hall are displayed the triumphs of Sethos
over the Schasu, the Cheta, and the Retennu; there are recorded the
campaigns already mentioned against the tribes of Cush, the Punt, and
the Naharina. Opposite Karnak, on the left bank of the Nile, north east
from the colossi of Amenophis III., at the village of Gurnah, he built a
temple to Ammon, and at Abydus a large sanctuary to Osiris.[235]

None of the Pharaohs undertook such numerous works and left behind so
many monuments as Ramses II. He completed the hall of his father at
Karnak,[236] and extended on a magnificent scale the temple of Amenophis
III. at Luxor, by adding on the north-east a second court, and adorning
the entrance to it by a lofty gateway. Before this he placed two seated
colossi, statues of himself--at present, like the lower parts of all the
ruins at Luxor, they are covered to a considerable height with sand--and
two obelisks of red granite, of which one still rises in splendour to
the blue sky, and displays the long, sharply-cut rows of the
hieroglyphics in all the brightness of the uninjured polish. The other
is at Paris, in the Place de la Concorde. On the left bank of the Nile,
between the colossi of Amenophis III. and his father's temple, a little
further to the west, and immediately at the foot of the Libyan range, he
built a large temple. A massive gateway rises on a slightly elevated
terrace, leading to a rectangular court. This is surrounded by a double
row of pillars supporting the portico, of which two only are now
standing. On this follows a second court, of which the portico is
supported on the right and left by double pillars, on the front
transverse side by single pilasters, and on the back by double
pilasters, against the first row of which lean colossal images of
Osiris. At the entrance from the first into the second court, on the
left, was the greatest of all the detached colossi in Egypt, the seated
statue of Ramses, hewn out of a block of red granite from Syene. Sixty
feet in height, this statue once overlooked both courts; now it lies
prostrate on the ground. The length of the middle finger is four feet.
There was apparently a second colossus on the other side of the entrance
corresponding to this. From the second court, in which are the remains
of two smaller colossi, three gates of black granite led into a great
hall, built on a higher level. The roof of this, the remains of which
exhibit a blue ground with gold stars, was supported by sixty pillars in
ten rows. Of these rows four are still standing; the pillars are 35 feet
in height and six feet in diameter. On this great hall adjoin three
smaller ones, on both sides of which lay chambers, and the roof of one
is adorned with a large astronomical painting. The back part of the
building was formed by vaulted porticoes of brick, and each brick is
stamped with the name-shield of Ramses II.[237]

The inscriptions on the second court and in the hall tell us, "that the
gracious god, _i.e._ the king, erected this great structure in honour of
his father Ammon-Ra, the king of the gods: by his own arm he has erected
it, the royal sun, the champion of justice, established by Ra, the child
of the sun, Ramses, beloved of Ammon, beloved of the goddess Mut." On
the walls of the portico between the first and second court is
represented a great procession to the altar of Ammon. Two rows of men
carry the statues of thirteen predecessors of Ramses on their shoulders
(p. 24). Further on the king, with a sickle, is cutting a sheaf of corn
from the field, a priest receives this from the hand of the king, and
offers it to a white bull. Then the priest bids the four geese belonging
to the four spirits of the quarters of the sky to fly south, north,
east, and west, in order to announce to the gods of each quarter, "that
Horus the son of Osiris, that king Ramses, established by Ra, has put on
the double crown."[238] The sculptures of the front side of the gateway
exhibit the king in intercourse with the gods, and symbolise the divine
expressions of favour towards Ramses. Gods lead him to the greater gods.
The god Tum places him before Mentu (p. 51). Mentu takes the hand of the
king, and says, "Come to the heavenly mansions, to behold thy father the
king of the gods, who will bestow upon thee length of days, to rule over
the world and reign upon the throne of Horus." Mentu leads the king to
Ammon, over whose figure we read, "Ammon-Ra, king of the gods, who
dwells in Ramses' house at Thebes, speaks thus: Beloved son of my race,
Ramses, lord of the world, my heart is glad in that I behold thy good
works; thou hast built me this house; I grant thee a pure life to live
upon the throne of Seb" (p. 55). In the hall Ammon is holding the crook
from his throne towards the king, and says, "I certify that thy building
shall continue as the heavens." The goddess Bast (p. 49) lifts her right
hand to the head of the king, and says, "I have prepared for thee the
diadem of the sun, that this helmet should remain upon thy brow, where I
have placed it." On another sketch in this hall Ammon is giving to
Ramses the scythe, the whip, and the crook (the symbols of dominion),
and says, "Take the scythe of battle to subdue the nations without, and
to smite off the head of the unclean; take the whip and the crook to
rule over Chemi (Egypt)." On the exterior of the wings of the gateway
are represented the wars which in the fifth year of his reign Ramses
carried on against the Cheta, and in the eighth year against Maram,
Dapur, and Salam (p. 152). In one of the side chambers of the hall
Ramses and his consort, together with the moon-god, Chunsu, and the
goddess Mut, are carried to Ammon by the priests. The goddess Mut says:
"I come to pay worship to the king of the gods, that he may secure long
years to his son, to king Ramses, who loves him." Chunsu says: "We come
to honour thee, Ammon, king of the gods; grant to thy son who loves
thee, the king of the world, a safe and pure life." The king and queen
also speak to Ammon; Ramses says: "I come to my father escorted by the
gods whom he at all times allows in his presence." And over the queen we
read: "Behold what the divine consort says, the royal mother, the mighty
mistress of the world:--I come to worship my father Ammon the king of
the gods; my heart is gladdened by thy favour. O thou who hast
established the seat of thy power in the dwelling of thy son Ramses,
lord of the world, grant to him a safe and pure life, and let his years
be numbered by the periods of the festivals." Finally, Ramses is
represented under an arbor vitæ (Persea) before the throne of Tum. Tum
and Thoth write the name of the king on leaves of the arbor vitæ, and
Tum says to Ramses: "I write thy name for a series of days that it may
be upon the divine tree." In another chamber we find the figures of the
children of Ramses; twenty-three sons and more than thirteen daughters
are mentioned in the inscription.[239]

This is the structure of which Diodorus gives the following account,
though he had not seen the work himself. "The entrance to the monument
of the king whom they call Osymandyas--such is the account in
Diodorus--was formed by a gateway covered with sculptures, 200 feet
broad, and forty-five cubits in height; through this you passed into a
rectangular court surrounded by pillars, measuring 400 feet on each
side, but in the place of pillars are statues sixteen cubits high, each
hewn in the antique style out of a single block. The roof of the portico
is two fathoms in width; it also is built of monoliths painted with
stars upon a blue ground. Behind this court there is a second gateway
similar to the first, but adorned with still richer sculptures. At the
entrance stand three monolithic statues. The middle one is the seated
image of Osymandyas, the largest in all Egypt, for the feet are more
than seven cubits in length; the two others, on the right and left,
which represent the wife and daughter of the king, are inferior in
height. This statue is not only remarkable for the size, but also for
the excellence of the art and the nature of the stone. In spite of the
enormous size, a chip or split is not to be found in it. There, too, is
the statue of the mother of Osymandyas, twenty cubits high, and also a
monolith. Behind this gateway is a second court, more marvellous even
than the first, in which various sculptures represent the war against
the Bactrians. This nation had revolted from the king, but with 400,000
foot and 20,000 horse he marched out against them, divided his army into
four parts, and put each under the command of one of his four sons. On
the first wall we see the king fighting at the head of his army against
a fortress surrounded by a river; a lion is seen at his side assisting
him (as a fact in the picture of the great battle against the Cheta on
the gateway a lion is found beside the chariot of the king.) On the
second wall the prisoners are brought forward: they are without their
hands and members, in order to indicate that they fought without spirit.
The third wall contains reliefs of various kinds and sketches
representing the king's sacrifice of bulls, and his triumphant return.
In the middle of the court stands an altar of marvellous size and
workmanship. Before the fourth wall are two seated colossi 27 cubits
high, and beside these three entrances lead into a colonnade, of which
the sides measure 200 feet. In this hall are a number of statues of wood
representing men in expectation of the decision of their law-suits, and
looking towards the judges. These, thirty in number, are engraved on one
of the walls; in their midst is the chief judge, on whose neck hangs a
picture of truth with closed eyes; beside him lie a great quantity of
books. Then you pass into a space intended for walking, where are
represented many of the most delicate kinds of food. Here also the image
of the king is engraved, and brightly coloured, showing how he offered
to the god the gold and silver which came to him year by year from the
mines of Egypt, and the total is written down close by; estimated in
silver, it amounted to 320,000 minæ. Then follows the sacred library,
and after this the images of all the gods of Egypt, and of the king, who
offers to each god the appropriate gifts, in order as it were to show to
Osiris and his assessors in the under world that the king had lived a
life just towards men and pious towards the gods. On the walls of the
library abuts another building, in which are twenty couches, the images
of Zeus and Hera, and the images of the king. In this chamber the king
appears to be buried. In a circle round this chamber are yet many other
rooms containing very beautiful pictures of all the animals worshipped
in Egypt. Through these chambers we reach the top of the sepulchre, a
golden circle 365 cubits in circumference, and one cubit thick. On this
circle are marked divisions for every day in the year, and in each is
noted the rising and setting of the stars, and the influence which the
Egyptian astrologers attributed to these constellations."[240]

The temple built by Ramses II. to Ammon, in Dongola, on Mount Barkal,
has been mentioned before (p. 154). A memorial stone discovered at
Dakkeh tells us that he caused wells to be dug in Ethiopia.[241] In
Nubia also, five or six days' journey to the south of Dakkeh, at Abu
Simbel, on the left bank of the Nile, a small valley with almost
perpendicular walls of rock breaks at right angles the ridge running by
the river side. In these walls of brownish yellow sandstone two temples
have been cut. The northern and larger is dedicated to Ra by Ramses; the
smaller, on the opposite side, is dedicated by Ramses' wife, Nefruari,
to the goddess Hathor. Before the temple of Hathor are six colossi,
three on either side of the entrance. In each triad the middle statue
represents the queen, the two others the kings. Before the temple of
Ramses are four seated colossi, with the arms upon the hips, hewn out of
the natural rock. All are statues of Ramses, and in height are over
sixty, or, counting the thrones, over seventy feet. The breadth across
the shoulders is twenty-five feet; from the elbow to the tip of the
finger measures fifteen feet. Seen from a distance, these statues are
very impressive, owing to their severe and calm beauty, and the
correctness of the proportions, notwithstanding the enormous scale. The
entrance to the temple lies deep down between the thrones of the
colossi. First we pass into a spacious portico, of which the roof is
supported by eight pillars, against which lean as many standing colossi
about 30 feet high, with arms crossed, the whip and the symbol of life
in their hands. All are images of Osiris. From this portico, out of
which doors open on either hand into side halls, we arrive through two
chambers into the sanctuary of the goddess, which lies 200 feet deep in
the rock. The whole excavation consists of fourteen chambers. The
sculptures, painted throughout, are uninjured still, and of the most
brilliant colours. The most striking pictures among them have been
mentioned above (pp. 153, 154). Below Abu Simbel, at Derr Sebua and Gerf
Hussein, on the Nile, Ramses II. built temples to Ra, Ammon, and Ptah.
Here, as at Abu Simbel, new cities rose round the temples.[242] Further
downwards at Beth-el-Walli, a temple was hewn in the rocks at the west
side of the Nile, the sculptures of which exhibit the exploits of Ramses
II. against the Negroes, and the booty of these campaigns--gazelles,
ostriches, giraffes (p. 153); while the ruins of the temple which he
built beside the larger one of his father to Osiris at Abydus, is
evidence of the honour which he paid to his predecessors in the kingdom
(pp. 24, 169).

Herodotus and Diodorus told us that Sesostris had set up before the
temple of Hephæstus (_i.e._ of Ptah) at Memphis statues of himself, his
wife, and his sons, on a colossal scale (p. 146). In the ruins of
Memphis (at the village of Mitrahinneh) there lies, surrounded by green
turf and tall palms, in a depression, the prostrate statue of Ramses II.
hewn out of a single block. The feet are wanting, the head wears the
crown of Upper and Lower Egypt; in the middle of the girdle are engraved
the words Mi Amun Ramses, _i.e._ Ramses beloved of Ammon. From the knees
upwards the fragment measures thirty-five feet; on this scale the total
height must have reached forty-two or forty-three feet. At Tanis in the
Delta, Ramses II. built or restored a great temple, and erected
obelisks. The inscriptions on the ruins speak of his victories in Syria.
Here also lies a prostrate and shattered colossus; the name-shields on
the back of the throne are those of the second Ramses.[243] Of the
buildings of this king for the sepulchral chambers of the Apis bulls at
Memphis, the fortification of the border towards Syria, and the canal,
we have spoken above (pp. 68, 157).

On the left bank of the Nile, westwards of the temple and the two
colossi of Amenophis III., at Medinet Habu, Ramses III. built a splendid
temple. A magnificent gate flanked by broad wings sixty-six feet in
height leads from the east to the first ante-court, which, as always, is
surrounded by a portico, partly supported by massive pillars, and partly
by statues of Osiris. From this court a second somewhat smaller gateway
leads into a second court; the portico surrounding this is supported to
the right and left on strong columns, of seven feet in diameter, the
capitals of which are formed by lotus-leaves, and on each of the other
sides by eight Osiris pillars. The columns and pillars, in spite of
their massiveness, do not seem too heavy to support the blocks which
form the roof of the portico. In this court we find the four pictures
which represent the war of Ramses III. against the Libyans (p. 164). The
ante-temple, to which the entrance lay between the Osiris pillars just
mentioned, the inner temple, and the shrine, are in ruins; the bases
only and the foundations can still be traced. In the ten reliefs
mentioned above the external wall of the second court displays in the
most brilliant colours the warlike achievements of Ramses III. against
the Temhu and Zakkarj (p. 165). About 120 steps to the south-east of the
first gateway are the ruins of another structure of this king, which
appears to have been his palace. Two obliquely rising towers enclose a
court, surrounded by a building several stories high. The rooms still
remaining are paved with slabs; the windows are square. The reliefs
represent the king surrounded by his wives, and then at draughts, the
instruction which his children receive in reading and writing from a
priest, and other household matters. On the right bank of the Nile at
the south-west edge of the terrace of Karnak, Ramses III. began to build
a temple to the moon-god Chunsu, which was completed by Ramses IV.; and
at Karnak itself, in the court before the great hall of Sethos I., he
erected a smaller temple, cutting the southern portico of this temple at
right angles, which he dedicated to "Ammon Ra, his father," to whom the
whole sanctuary belonged.[244]

As at Memphis, so also at Thebes, great care was taken for the dead. Not
far from the city, in the first Libyan range of hills, which here rise
300 feet out of the plain, lie the tombs of the inhabitants of Thebes,
running on into these hills for two hours' distance in an unbroken
series of catacombs. The graves, and the passages which lead to them,
are all hewn in the rock, sometimes to a considerable depth. Several
rows of chambers lie one over the other. In the lower rows, where the
richer class are buried, the chambers are larger and more handsome;
those in the upper rows are simpler, smaller, and meaner. Staircases,
straight or winding, connect these stories and chambers with each other.
Galleries, gangways, and perpendicular shafts break the rows of
excavations, and give to this city of the dead the features of an
inextricable labyrinth. These catacombs, with their thousands of
mummies, innumerable chambers full of papyrus rolls and amulets buried
with the corpses, with their sculptures and frescoes on the walls and
roofs, which are for the most part preserved in marvellous brilliancy
and represent in the truest and most varied manner the occupation of
every person buried there of the higher orders, are an almost
inexhaustible source for the knowledge of the life and the habits of
that distant time.

Separated from the first range of hills by a lonely and desolate ravine,
there rises further to the west a second wall of rock, which the Arabs
call Biban-el-Moluk, _i.e._ the gates of the kings. In this lie the
largest and most richly-furnished tombs. The kings of the old monarchy
heaped mountains of stone over their graves at Memphis, and in like
manner the princes of the new kingdom caused vaults and porticoes to be
hewn in the rocks for their sepulchral chambers. Here in antiquity forty
tombs were enumerated,[245] and the latest investigations have confirmed
this enumeration. Spacious, but often barred, passages lead sometimes
only fifty, sometimes 360 feet into the rock. The greater part of the
tombs consist of a suite of galleries, chambers, and chapels for the
offering of sacrifices to the dead; these are followed by the sepulchral
chamber, where rests the sarcophagus, sometimes in a deep niche. The
Pharaohs of Thebes appear to have carried on their work upon these
burying-places in the same manner as the princes of the old kingdom
proceeded with the building of their pyramids. They commenced with the
entrance, the ante-chapel (a broad and not very long portico, generally
supported on pillars), and a small chamber, the real sepulchre.[246] If
the length of the reign sufficed, a new passage was driven deeper into
the rock from the chamber, a new and larger ante-chapel, a wider and
higher sepulchral chamber was excavated. All the graves as yet opened
and examined in this wall of rock are entered by square doors of uniform
shape, with simple ornamentation. At one time they were provided with
wings for security in closing. Behind them the corridor descends
somewhat rapidly into the deep rock. As a rule the sculptures on the
inner walls begin from the doors immediately behind this entrance. The
colouring is still lively, not to say harsh.

The oldest tombs lie to the north-east; but as yet only two chambers
have been opened here, one of which is large in size and adorned with
beautiful, though very much injured sculptures, the grave of Amenophis
III.[247] The tombs of the Tuthmosis have not yet been found. Next, on
the south-west, lies the tomb of Ramses I. The rock chamber and the
granite sarcophagus, which is still standing there, are without any
ornament whatever except a few pictures on the walls, in which the god
Tum and the goddess Neith, the great mother, the lady of heaven, the
queen of the deities, lead the king before Osiris. The king speaks, "I
have come to thee, lord of the gods, mighty god, master of the sky,"
while Neith says to the king, "I secure to thee the throne of Osiris, on
which thou shalt sit for ever."[248] The grave of his successor, Sethos
I., consists of a suite of galleries, chambers, and chapels. A corridor
leads to a staircase, which ends in a chamber; from this a second
staircase leads to a portico, on which abuts a great hall, the roof of
which is supported by four pillars. A third staircase leads from this
hall on the left into one similarly adorned, of which the pictures
remain unfinished, and on the right into a broad vaulted portico sunk
more than 300 feet deep into the rock. The roof of this portico is
supported by six pillars. Here the corpse of the king rested in a
sarcophagus of alabaster, which is covered with sculptures. The
sarcophagus, now in the British Museum, was empty when found, and the
cover was broken. The sculptures of the first hall display on every side
of the pillars the king and a deity. Those on the walls represent the
stations of the nightly course of the sun and the hindrances thrown in
the way of the sun by the serpent Apep (p. 46), the judgment in the
under world, the reward of the good, the punishment of the bad, the
constellations of the sky, the five planets in their boats, and the four
tribes into which the Egyptians divided mankind. Each tribe is
represented by four figures.

Of the grave of Ramses II. but few chambers have as yet been
opened.[249] The grave of his son Menephta presents nothing more than a
picture referring to the under world. Beside Menephta, Amenmessu (p.
162) and Menephta's son, Sethos II., found their resting places in these
rocks, which also conceal Menephta II. (p. 163). The grave of Sethos II.
is distinguished by paintings and sculptures. The sarcophagus of red
granite is intended to exhibit on the lid the image of the king, but
this remained unfinished.[250] The grave of Ramses III. comes nearest to
that of Sethos I. in size and splendour of adornment. Galleries
following one upon the other, on the side of which are small chambers,
lead to a large portico in which rests the sarcophagus. The sculptures
in these chambers exhibit scenes of court life, of agriculture, of the
banquet, musicians, boats, and weapons; those of the galleries and the
portico represent scenes of the under world and existence beyond the
grave. The grave of Ramses IV., far smaller and incomplete, still
contains the shattered sarcophagus of granite.[251] On the other hand,
the tomb of Ramses V., one of the most handsome, displays on the arching
of the roof of the great portico, where the sarcophagus stood, the
outstretched form of the goddess of the sky, in which are enclosed the
stars. On the walls are depicted the fortunes of the soul in the next
world, and the king in the boat of the sun-god. These representations of
the judgment in the under-world, which recur perpetually in the tombs at
Biban-el-Moluk, and of the life to come, are wholly unknown to the
pyramids and the tombs surrounding them, the burying-places of the
ancient kingdom.

FOOTNOTES:

[234] Diod. 1, 45; Strabo, p. 816.

[235] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 256; Mariette, "Revue Arch." 1860, 2, 21;
_cf. supra_, p. 23, 56.

[236] Lepsius, _loc. cit._ s. 273, 274.

[237] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 286; "Denkmale aus Ægypten und Nubien," 1,
2, 7, 82; Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 161.

[238] Rosell. "Monum. Stor." 1, 123, 136.

[239] Champollion, "Lettres," p. 263-283; Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," pp.
163-165.

[240] Diod. 1, 47-49.

[241] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 151.

[242] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 112-115, 263, 403, 414.

[243] As this statue bears on the right shoulder the shield Ra Apepi, or
Apepa, it has been thought to be the statue of the shepherd king Apepi
(p. 130). Lepsius regards it as a statue of Ramses II.--"Königsbuch," s.
44.

[244] Brugsch, Hist. d'Egypte, pp. 197, 198.

[245] Strabo, p. 816, puts the number of the royal sepulchres at forty.
Diodorus, on the authority of the sacred records, speaks of forty-seven
graves. At the time of Ptolemy I. only seventeen were in existence
(Diod. 1, 46), and of these, at the time when Diodorus travelled in
Egypt, the greater part were destroyed. Lepsius gives twenty-five graves
of kings, and fifteen graves of the wives of the kings ("Briefe," s.
270).

[246] Brugsch, "Reiseberichte," s. 324.

[247] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 288.

[248] Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 128.

[249] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 266; Rosellini, "Mon. Stor." 3, 2, 284.

[250] Bunsen, "Ægypten," 4, 213.

[251] On the sketch of this tomb on a Turin papyrus, cf. Lepsius, "Abh.
der Berl. Akad." 1867.




CHAPTER VIII.

LIFE AND MANNERS OF THE EGYPTIANS.


We have already called attention to the peculiar features in the
position and nature of their country which favoured the development of
the Egyptians. The shape of the land, so conducive to unity, must have
led at an early time to a community of life; the protection of this
favoured valley against the plundering tribes of the desert must have
called into existence a military monarchy. But it is no longer in the
form of a patriarchal rule or military chieftainship that the monuments
and tradition display the government of Egypt. It is the form of
despotism peculiar to the East, which meets us at the threshold of
history, meets us, too, in a very sharply-defined form. Herodotus says
that the Egyptians could not have lived without a king, and Diodorus
tells us that the Egyptians worshipped their kings, and prostrated
themselves before them as though they were really gods. Of men who could
confer such great blessings as their kings the Egyptians assumed that
they partook of the nature of gods.[252] As a fact, we see on the
monuments not only the commanders and magistrates of the districts, but
even the priests, in the dust before the kings. It is true that it was
the universal custom in the East to approach the ruler kneeling, as one
on whose nod depended the life and death of every subject at every
moment of his existence; but the Egyptians, led by their peculiar
religious views, have gone further than any other nation in the
exaltation of the power of the monarch; they worshipped their kings as
the deities of the land. As in the beginning, according to the teaching
of the priests, the gods ruled over Egypt, so in subsequent times the
Pharaohs occupy the place of the gods. They do not merely spring from
the gods; they are themselves gods of the land. They are not only called
children of the sun; but to their subjects they are the "sun itself,
which is given to the world," which beams over the land and gives
blessing and increase; they are the "outpourers of life," like the gods.
Like the gods, they are lords of truth and justice; they preserve order,
punish the bad, and reward the good, and keep away the unclean enemies;
through their care it is that their subjects share in the fruits of the
earth, hence they cause Egypt to live. The king of Egypt is called, and
is, "the mighty Horus," the god who gives blessing to the land. If to
the Egyptians animals and men were the manifestations of the divine
nature, must they not recognise such manifestations in peculiar potency
in the life of the king, in the ruling, arranging, and sustaining power
of the king over the whole land? This conception of the king as a god on
earth has been already brought before us in the inscription on the
statue of Chafra, the builder of the second largest pyramid, which
describes him as the "good god, the master and gold Horus" (p. 95). It
continues unchanged to the last centuries of the kingdom, and even
survives the independence of Egypt. In the inscriptions of the temples
the Ptolemies and Roman Cæsars are named by the same solemn titles as
the ancient Pharaohs.[253]

We saw that priests were allotted to the spirits of the buried kings (p.
99). In the ruins at Luxor, spirits of heaven are carrying Amenophis
III. into the presence of Ammon, who consecrates him king (p. 138). In
the Ramesseum and in the palace at Medinet Habu we have pictures of the
coronation of Ramses II. and Ramses III. In both, the four geese of the
four spirits of heaven are bidden by the priest to announce to the
spirits of the east and west, of the north and the south, that the king
has put on the double crown. In the rock temple at Selseleh (p. 149),
the goddess Anuke gives her breast to king Horus, who is depicted as
already grown into a youth; in the rock temple at Beth-el-Walli, Isis
and Anuke allow Ramses II. to suck at their breasts. In the Ramesseum,
Ramses II. is led by the gods Mentu and Chunsu and the goddess Mut
before Ammon (p. 171). These pictures, in which gods bring the kings
before Ammon, and worship him, that he may bestow life and purity on the
princes presented by them, are constantly recurring. On the monuments
the kings are found sacrificing, not only to their divine forefathers,
but also to themselves and their own divinity (p. 24). Tuthmosis III.
dedicated a temple to the god Sesurtesen III., and ordained regular
sacrifices to him; and Amenophis III. built a temple in Nubia to his own
divinity (pp. 134, 137).

Nowhere do we find a trace to show that the kings stood in need of the
intervention of the priests in order to approach the gods, and without
such intervention there can be no supremacy of the priests over the
sovereigns of the state. Everywhere the kings come independently before
the gods. Everywhere we find the sacrifices of the kings, not of the
priests, offered. It is the kings who consecrate temples to the gods, in
order that the king may obtain "lasting life and purity." It is the
Pharaohs and not the priests who represent the state and people before
the gods. The kings are at the same time the high priests, and stand at
the head of religion as at the head of the state; their sons and
grandsons, their mothers, wives, and daughters, are, according to the
inscriptions, the priests of this or that god or goddess. The kings, as
Diodorus assures us, were not waited upon by slaves, but by the sons of
the most distinguished priests; by priests only could the ruling god of
the country be served--and the priests did not omit to mention on their
tombs, even at a very early period, the king in whose service they were
prophets, scribes, and minstrels. In a word, the Pharaoh was not merely
the head of the state, but also of the church, if such an expression may
be allowed, and the power of the priests, without any real and
ceremonial support, does not extend beyond the moral influence which
religion exercised upon the heart of the king. Finally, it is the kings
who are celebrated as the lawgivers of the land, and this excludes any
thought of a supremacy of priests. Yet the influence of religion and of
the priesthood on the king is not to be contested, although, under the
military princes who governed Egypt after the expulsion of the Hyksos,
the priests had to share their influence with the leaders of the army.
Not till the time of Menephta, do we observe a more influential position
assumed by the high priests at Thebes. This influence goes on increasing
under the weak successors of Ramses III., and reaches its summit under
the first princes of the dynasty of Tanis. Then it declined, and
afterwards only came into operation under foreign supremacy.

If further proof were needed for the unlimited power of the kings than
their representation of Ra and Horus, and the menial position of the
priests, we should find it in the gigantic structures which the Pharaohs
left behind them. To carry out works of this kind is impossible unless
the monarch has absolute disposal of the labour of his subjects. But
these buildings were undoubtedly the main interest and the main
occupation of the kings. In this they follow the characteristic traits
of the whole nation. In building temples and erecting images, their
object was just as much to confer honour on the gods as to preserve the
remembrance of the homage which they had offered to them. The
preservation of their own actions and names, which these buildings in
the eyes of the Egyptians "caused to live," is the main object of the
structure, and along with the sacrifices of the kings, and the evidence
of the favour of the gods, the sculptures on the temples display the
martial exploits of the kings. If the kings erected pyramid tombs, it
was in order that their corpses might rest in security, and the tumulus
"cause their name to live" in the generations to come. If they built
temples, it was that the gates, walls, frescoes, and inscriptions might
preserve their acts for posterity. The buildings of the Pharaohs are the
history of their reigns written in stone.

The ceremonial which surrounded the life of the Pharaohs is described by
Diodorus. In the morning the king first read the communications received
from every quarter; then he performed his ablutions, put on his robes,
and offered sacrifice to the gods. While the sacrificial animal was
being led to the altar the high priest offered prayer to the gods,
beseeching them to grant life and all good things to the king, as he was
a righteous ruler. He was pious to the gods, gentle towards men, strong,
just, and courageous, an enemy of lies, a sharer of his goods with
others, and master of his desires; one who did not punish the wicked so
severely as they deserved, and gave to the good more than their
proportionate share. Then the priest laid the punishment of any error
into which the king might have fallen on his servants, and urged him to
a pious life, "not by reproaches," as Diodorus expressly observes, "but
by commendations." When the sacrifice was finished, the priest read to
the king the apothegms and achievements of distinguished men, that is,
no doubt, of previous kings, out of the sacred books. We know that poems
of considerable extent on historical subjects were in existence.[254] In
the same way the remaining part of the day was allotted to definite
occupations. For walking, for bathing, even for sleeping with the queen,
definite hours were appointed. The king might only eat the flesh of
calves and geese--the food of the priests--and take a fixed portion of
wine. Diodorus regards it as wonderful that the kings should have
subjected themselves to this ceremonial. In this he leaves out of sight
the fact that the god of the land was expected to lead the life of a
god, and also, a thing which could not indeed be so obvious to him, that
all periods present proofs to what oppressive rules of state and
etiquette rulers are willing to subject themselves in order to exhibit
their dignity and majesty. Yet this was not the object chiefly held in
view in the regulation of the king's life, nor was it the love of the
Egyptians for systematic and fixed arrangements. The king was at the
same time the first priest of the land; and therefore the regulations of
the priestly life applied to him also. Moreover, the Egyptians were
extremely careful to keep themselves pure from the unclean, in order by
such purity to preserve life and salvation. With this object, priests
and laity alike regulated all their actions, their eating and drinking,
feeding and clothing, by a minute ritual. It was the first duty of the
king to protect the purity of Egypt. He was the Horus of the land, who
had struck down disorder, impurity, and evil, and therefore, like the
victorious god, he must shine out in the brightness of unsullied purity.
Thus the king had to lead the pure life of a priest; he could eat none
but the priestly food, and every duty must be performed at a favourable
moment, for the Egyptians were under the dominion of a widespread
astrological superstition. This system further required that every fault
he might happen to commit should be taken from him and laid upon others.
It is probably the plan sketched by the priests for the king's life, of
which Diodorus has preserved some traces; we know that among the sacred
books those of the minstrels contained regulations for the life of the
king. Whatever flattery and homage was thus intended for the great and
gracious king, the Pharaohs no doubt observed so much as seemed
suitable to them. Of a later king, Amasis, we are told that he
emancipated himself from the customary ceremonial, and when business was
over, gave himself up to relaxation and enjoyment. Yet his reign was a
long one, and regarded with affection by the Egyptians.

The Pharaohs were surrounded with all the state of Oriental despots. On
the picture of the coronation, the assumption of the Pschent by Ramses
III. at Medinet Habu, the procession is led by trumpeters, who are
followed by commanders and magistrates. Twenty-two priests lead the
statue of Ammon, who is followed by a priest with incense, and a scribe
who appears to read a proclamation. The king is then carried in by
twelve richly-attired men on a throne under a canopy. Beside the throne
walk certain officers, who cool the king with large fans; others carry
the weapons of the king and the insignia of his power. Behind follow the
captains of the army and the body-guard. Then a white bull is led in the
procession by priests, and the whole closes with priests carrying the
name-shields of the predecessors of the king. On descending from the
throne the king makes a libation towards Ammon, burns incense to him,
and cuts off some ears of corn with a golden sickle.[255] The court was
numerous: fan-bearers on the right, and fan-bearers on the left, bearers
of the parasol, keepers of the king's bow, captains of the body-guard,
overseers of the palace, overseers of the buildings in Upper and Lower
Egypt, overseers of the horses, books, and music, stewards of the
granaries in Upper and Lower Egypt, stewards of the royal flocks,
treasurers, butlers of the palace, and other officers are
mentioned.[256] According to the monuments, the king's household
furniture was profuse in silver and gold. The gondolas were gilded, with
variegated sails, the trappings of the horses were splendidly
ornamented, the stuffed seats curiously carved and richly decked; and of
the complicated occupations of the royal kitchen, of the number of
people employed, of cup-bearers and master cooks, as well as of the
preparation of the food--the monuments give us a very complete idea.

The death of the king was mourned for seventy days, like the death of an
Apis. During this time everyone had to abstain from baths, from flesh
and wine, until the son of the ruler, who had entered into Amenti,
ascended the throne as a new Horus and giver of life to the land, and
the visage of the new lord again "beamed like a sun over both the lands
of Egypt" after the days of lamentation. The succession, so far as we
can see, was not infrequently broken by usurpations, which have always
been inseparable from the despotic form of government.[257]

It is characteristic of the all-absorbing power of the monarchy in Egypt
that tradition can scarcely mention a single eminent person beside the
names of the kings. We hear nothing of generals or statesmen, and
scarcely of priests. All stood in equal subjection to the king. Though
families may have at one time arisen from the nation, which were in a
position, from wealth and inclination, to undertake the defence of the
valley of the Nile against the tribes of the desert, and though the
monarchy may have arisen out of the ranks of this military nobility,
which in bygone times united the valley of the Nile into a kingdom,
still, so far as the monuments allow us to see, there is no trace left
of the eminent position of any nobility, whether military or hereditary.
The military order, as presented to us on the monuments, and by the
tradition of the Greeks, no longer consisted of wealthy landowners who
went to war at the bidding of the king with their chariots and horses
and retainers; they are merely soldiers--families, who for a certain
portion of land given to them by the state are pledged to service in
war, and who receive their weapons from the armouries of the state. Such
are the warriors on the monuments even in the times of the Amenemha and
Sesurtesen, and also under Ramses III. Herodotus tells us that each
family of warriors possessed twelve measures of good land, free of
taxes, the measure being 100 Egyptian cubits in length and breadth. This
would make the allotment more than twelve acres. These families,
according to Herodotus, could, even about the middle of the fifth
century B.C., put in the field 400,000 men, although two hundred years
before, under Psammetichus I., a large number of them, it is said more
than 200,000, migrated into Ethiopia. The military order was divided
into two classes: the Hermotybians, numbering at most 160,000 men, and
the Kalasirians, about 250,000 strong. In the time of Herodotus, the
first were settled in Upper Egypt in the province of Chemmis, and mainly
in the western Delta; the Kalasirians were in the province of Thebes,
and in the central and eastern Delta.[258] Each division furnished
yearly 1,000 men for the bodyguard of the king, who were handsomely
provided for, and the garrisons in the border towns and strongholds,
which were also relieved year by year. From the masses of the two
divisions so many may have been told off for field duty as were
considered necessary. From the numbers which Herodotus gives it is not
impossible that the armies of Sethos and Ramses II., when all the
soldiers were called out, were, if not 700,000, yet from 400,000 to
500,000 strong. Under Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-247 B.C.) the army of
Egypt was estimated at 240,000 men.

The monuments prove that even at the time of the Sesurtesen and
Amenemha, war was scientifically carried on, and the soldiers regularly
drilled. From the royal armouries the infantry were provided with bows,
helmets, shields, lances, and crooked knives, and were divided into
battalions, each carrying its own ensign. The heavy infantry moved in
ranks to the sound of trumpets. Attacks were not made on fortified
cities without the ram, and sheds to protect the attacking party.
Instead of cavalry, which never occur on the monuments, we find, though
not till after the time of the Hyksos, numerous war-chariots in use.
Those who fought in the chariots, as the kings, who are invariably
represented as fighting from a chariot, made use of bows. The monuments
often exhibit practice in archery. With the Egyptians, as with the whole
of the East in antiquity, the bow was the favourite weapon.

To the priestly order Egypt owed the growth and establishment of her
cultus, the peculiar turn of her religious conceptions, her moral law,
her writings, her art, and her science. The piety of the people and the
kings had amply endowed the temples. "The priests eat nothing of their
own," says Herodotus; "sacred bread is daily baked for them, and they
obtain vegetables, geese, calves' flesh, and wine in sufficient
quantities."[259] Diodorus tells us that the land in ancient Egypt was
divided into three portions, of which a third belonged to the kings, a
third to the priests for their support and the maintenance of the
sacrifices and festivals, and another third to the military order, and
that all the farmers in Egypt held on leases;[260] and we have already
seen that at any rate a part of the land, though by no means so much as
a third, was really allotted to the soldiers, who could scarcely have
leased their small patches, but must have cultivated them in person if
they wished to live upon them with their families. Another part of the
land was marked off for the maintenance of the priests and the expenses
of public worship; but it appears that this land also belonged to the
king, for Herodotus speaks of the incomes of the priests as gifts
received from the king;[261] and the Hebrew Scriptures also tell us that
"the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their
portion which Pharaoh gave them."[262] From these data--even if the
statement of Herodotus, that Sesostris (Ramses II.) had given an equal
square of land to every Egyptian, must be limited to a measurement of
the land, in order to regulate the taxes[263]--it appears that the
Pharaohs looked on themselves as the proprietors of the soil--a view by
no means strange to the despotisms of the East--and in consequence they
allotted to the soldiers so much as was necessary, and of the rest
allowed a great portion, which was estimated at a third of the whole, to
pay taxes to the temples, while the remainder contributed to themselves.
According to the statements of the Hebrews the taxes amounted to a fifth
of the produce,[264] and hence all the farmers could with justice be
considered leaseholders, or at any rate as having copyhold estates. It
is expressly observed that only the farms of the soldiers were free from
taxes,[265] and that the land which was taxed for the temples
contributed nothing to Pharaoh.[266] At the same time it is easily
intelligible that the piety of the subjects provided additional incomes
for the priests, and that, so far as it was possible to make any
arrangements of the kind, land and revenues were presented to the
temples.[267]

The maintenance which they derived from the incomes and contributions of
the temple-lands, in corn, wine, and animals for sacrifice, enabled the
priests to live for their religious duties, for the complete
performance of their customs in regard to purification and food, and
for the study of the holy scriptures. They were divided into various
classes and corporations. In every temple there was one upper
priest,--the head of the temple--the prophet,[268] a temple scribe, who
was especially skilled in writing, and managed the temple property, a
chamberlain, who took care of the clothing of the images, the
sacrifices, and the ritual, an astronomer, who had to observe the
heavens, and a minstrel. In the processions the prophet carried the jar
of water for purifications; the chamberlain carried the cubit of justice
and a basin for sprinkling water; the scribe can be recognised by the
feather in his head-dress, the roll of books in one hand, and the pen in
the other; the astronomer by an hour-glass and a palm branch, the symbol
of the seasons among the Egyptians. These higher classes of the
priesthood were followed by the lower; the pastophors, who carried the
images in the processions, and practised medicine, the attendants, male
and female ("the nurses"), of the sacred animals, the persons whose duty
it was to select and seal the animals for sacrifice, the embalmers, and
lastly, the temple-servants, who were responsible for the purifications.
The first sanctuaries in Egypt were the temples of Ammon at Thebes, of
Ptah at Memphis, and of Ra at Heliopolis. The colleges at these temples
were the most important centres of priestly life and doctrine. So long
as Thebes was the metropolis of the kingdom, the high priest of Ammon at
Thebes was the first priest in the land. Herodotus tells us from the
lips of the priests of Thebes that the office of high priest descended
from father to son, and Diodorus maintains that the same was the case
with all the officers of the temples.[269] These statements are
contradicted by the inscriptions. They mention five places in the
temples through which all "fifth priests" must pass. From a memorial
stone of a priest, Bakenchunsu, we learn that for fifteen years he was
third priest, and for twelve years second priest of Ammon at Thebes;
then he became first priest of this god, and continued to be so to the
end of his life.

The priests had to lead a holier and purer life than the laity. The
ritual, the rules for purification and food, which the priests laid upon
themselves, were stricter than those expected from the rest of the
people. The priest must wash twice in each day and each night. Every
third day he must shave his whole body, more especially his eyebrows and
beard. He might only wear linen clothing (byssus), and shoes of papyrus.
Any other clothing, and especially the hair and skins of beasts, defiled
a priest; though on monuments the priests of Osiris wear leopard skins,
especially at the ceremony of the burial. The flesh of sheep, swine, and
most other animals was forbidden to the priests; they might never touch
fish. Pulse they might not eat, and beans were not even to be looked at.
They observed frequent fasts. From time to time they underwent certain
mortifications, which in one instance continued for forty-two days, in
order to destroy in themselves the forty-two deadly sins. Finally the
priests could only marry one wife; while the laity were allowed to have
other wives beside the first. The kings had more than one wife, and this
was the rule among the wealthier class in Egypt.[270]

We are not informed how sharply the different orders in Egypt were
separated, or how far the different occupations were distinguished among
the labouring or trading population in addition to the classes of
priests and soldiers. We do not know, for instance, in what degree the
tiller of the soil was distinguished from the artizan. We are only told
that the people were divided into husbandmen, artizans, and shepherds,
and the shepherds were regarded as the lowest class. But we learn that
no one was allowed to follow any other occupation than that derived from
his father.[271] The inscriptions tell us that the same office, as for
instance that of architect, remained in the same family for twenty-three
generations;[272] and in the seventh century B.C. a kind of caste grew
up out of a number of Egyptian boys, whom Psammetichus handed over to
his Ionian mercenaries. Hence we may conclude that the impulse to
perpetuate types and lock up occupations in hereditary circles and fixed
families was very strong, as was natural enough with the fixed and
conservative character of the Egyptians. But however strong the impulse,
however deeply rooted the custom for the son to follow the father's
profession, there was in Egypt no caste in the strict sense of the term.
Marriages between the orders were not forbidden, and it is exclusiveness
in this point which completes the idea of caste. Moreover in Egypt there
were adoptions and transitions from one order to another. The sepulchral
pillars never lay any weight on birth in a certain order, but rather
show that members of the same family had belonged to different
orders--that a man could be at once a priest and a soldier, and Diodorus
remarks that in Egypt all were regarded as of equally honourable birth.
The statement that the shepherds were held in the least estimation is
probably correct, for the reason that their unrestrained occupation was
least adapted for subjection to fixed rules of life and a strict ritual;
but that statement, like the assertion in Genesis that "cowherds were an
abomination to the Egyptians," is not to be taken in reference to the
breeders of oxen and the care of flocks, which was carried on with great
vigour among the Egyptians, but to the nomadic tribes who wandered with
their flocks on the broad marshes of the Delta, or on the pastures of
the Libyan and Arabian ranges, and were wholly strangers to all settled
life. When we are told that the swineherds were held in especial
contempt, we must remember that to the Egyptians the swine was an
unclean animal.[273] Hence we may consider it as certain that custom
required the Egyptian to follow the trade of his father, and caused the
father to live again in his son, but no law of religion or state turned
the orders into castes, and that the various classes of trades and
professions were neither haughty and exclusive, nor servile and
submissive towards each other, but all lived together on a tolerable
equality.

Beside the respect and weight which the religious importance of their
order, their general knowledge and science gave to the priests, it was
to them more especially that the honour of serving the king fell. We
cannot doubt that the public officers were mainly taken from the order
of priests, which was also the order of scribes. Egypt was not, like the
great monarchies of the ancient East, a state founded by conquest, in
which the lord of the victorious people was master of the conquerors and
the conquered also, and in which it was all-important to retain the
conquered nation in subjection; it was a compact district inhabited by
the same tribe. Here, if we make an exception in favour of the
transitory conquests in Nubia and Arabia, there were no extensive and
distant provinces to be held in check. The departments in the land were
small, their number reached forty-four;[274] the officers, whom the king
set over them, were in his sight, they could not assume the position of
refractory pashas. They were nominated out of the members of the royal
house (the monuments furnish instances), the priests, the soldiers, and
also out of the people. Royal scribes and judges, "scribes of justice,"
were allotted to these prefects. As the Egyptians early arrived at a
written law, as religion and justice were closely connected, and the
priests were acquainted with the art of writing, the prefects of the
provinces were without doubt assisted by men from the priestly order in
the exercise of their judicial duties. Besides the maintenance of the
peace and the administration of justice, it was their duty to provide
for the cultivation of the land, the collection and transmission of the
taxes to the king. Even the soldiers settled in the provinces seem to
have been subject to their rule. The gold and copper mines on the Upper
Nile and in Sinai appear to have been put under the care of special
officers, and the products were conveyed under military protection to
the treasury of the king (p. 105).

The officers of the central government surrounded the person of the king
(p. 190). Even the administration of justice, according to Diodorus, was
centred in a supreme court, consisting of thirty judges, ten of the best
men from Heliopolis, ten from Memphis, and ten from Thebes. Without
doubt these judges belonged to the three priestly colleges of Memphis,
Thebes, and Heliopolis. From these thirty the president was chosen, and
on his breast, attached to a golden chain, he wore a shield of precious
stones, beautifully wrought, which the Egyptians named "Truth" (p. 174).
This court of the thirty no doubt gave very honourable decisions, and in
accordance with law, unless the king were interested in the result, or
preferred to pass sentence himself. Diodorus further informs us that the
laws of the Egyptians were collected in eight books, and were always
kept at hand by the judges. The first written laws were given by Menes
to the Egyptians, who declared that he had received them from the god
Thoth. These laws had been enlarged by "Sasychis," who at the same time
left the most accurate rubrics for the service of the gods, discovered
geometry, and taught astronomy. Then Sesosis (Sesostris) laid down the
laws for the kings, and the army. Finally the kings Bocchoris and Amasis
completed the laws of Egypt. Herodotus praises a king "Asychis," whom he
places after Menkera (p. 16), as the giver of the laws of mortgage. From
Diodorus we also learn, and the monuments confirm his statement, that a
written process went on before the court, that plaint and answer,
rejoinder and reply, were given in, in writing; and this custom,
considering the delight of the Egyptians in writing, did not appear for
the first time in the later period of legal administration. The
contracts and bills of sale found in tombs of the time of the Ptolemies
are drawn up with the most circumstantial accuracy, and furnished with
the signatures of many witnesses.[275] What Diodorus tells us of the law
of Egypt with respect to _meum_ and _tuum_ gives evidence of a certain
gentleness and humanity. The interest was never to exceed the amount of
the capital. Slavery for debt was not allowed; the sons of all the wives
shared equally in the inheritance. The murder of a slave was punished
with death, just as the murder of an Egyptian. Perjury was threatened
with the same penalty. Anyone who falsified documents or measures had
his hand cut off. In the confession which the souls made before Osiris
(p. 79), especial emphasis is laid on the fact that the dead man had
not falsified measures or seals, that he had practised no deceit in the
law court, and had lent no money upon usury. The punishments inflicted
on the guilty are characteristic of the East: the stocks, compulsory
labour at the mines and quarries, loss of the nose, excision of the
tongue, and mutilation were the usual penalties.[276]

Beside the law of the state stood the law of religion, of the priests.
It was not sufficient to offer bread, and geese, and thighs of bulls, to
pour drink-offerings of milk and wine, and "all things whereon the
divine nature lives," to burn frankincense before the images of the
gods, to offer the firstlings of the fruits, figs, onions, and flowers,
to set up in the temples dedicatory offerings, small statues, crowns,
and rings, to celebrate in honour of the gods of the district the great
and small festivals, to honour the dead and bring sacrifice to them at
the beginning and end of the year, at the festivals of the great and the
little heat, on the monthly and fortnightly festivals (the calendars of
the festivals on the monuments exhibit an almost unbroken series of
sacrifices), to attend to the animals of the sacred kinds and bury them
handsomely, "to give bread to the hungry, water to the thirsty, clothes
to the naked, and shelter to the wanderer"--the whole life must be a
religious service. In their favoured land the Egyptians considered
themselves a favoured people. Full of gratitude to the gods who had
given them this land and this life, they looked with contempt on the
unclean and perverse nations who dwelt beyond the valley of the Nile. To
keep themselves clean from the unclean is the essential task of their
lives. To the merely superficial view, cleanliness of body and clothing
seems cleanliness of soul and life. But this purity, which the law of
the priests required from every Egyptian, and above all and in an
especial degree from the priests, was not limited to simple and natural
cleanliness. There were beneficent life-giving gods, and there were also
evil and destructive deities. To these belonged the side of nature which
seemed to correspond to their being. Contact with this side of nature is
not only displeasing to the good and pure gods, it gives the evil
influences power over the men contaminated by it. Hence for the
salvation of men such contact must be shunned. Certain things must be
avoided for clothing and others for nourishment, certain impulses must
not be satisfied, or must at any rate be limited.

This conception introduced certain usages and customs, which were
developed by the priests into a system of rules for purification and
food. Herodotus says, "the Egyptians are the most religious of all men;
they have a severe and strict service, and many sacred customs." The
boys were circumcised. Beans, rye, and barley might not be eaten; the
flesh of many animals and many kinds of fish was forbidden. It was not
lawful to eat the head of any animal. The animals for sacrifice must
first be examined by the priests, to see that they did not belong to the
sacred kinds--to sacrifice these was an inexpiable offence--and whether
in other respects they were without blemish and pleasing to the gods.
This examination was the duty of the class of temple-servants already
mentioned, and it devolved on them to mark the animals found to be clean
with a seal, which in bulls was placed on the horns. The Egyptians never
ate at the same table with strangers, nor used a cup from which a
stranger had drunk, nor ate flesh cooked in the vessel of a stranger
and cut with a stranger's knife; all strangers and their utensils were
unclean. Nothing woollen might be taken into a temple or a tomb. The
Egyptians always wore newly-washed under-clothing of linen; they were
obliged frequently to wash their bodies, and for three days in each
month they used means of evacuation, clysters and emetics, in order to
cleanse the body internally.[277] These statements are confirmed by
papyrus rolls containing medicinal precepts. If the king, a sacred
animal, or a member of the family died, no one was allowed to wear white
or bright-coloured clothes; he must shave his eyebrows, and abstain from
intercourse with his wife and from baths. Men and women threw dust on
their heads and faces, and the women ran to and fro wailing with bare
breasts.[278]

If an Egyptian had not committed murder, theft, or adultery, if he had
not defamed the gods nor the king, nor those in authority over him, nor
his own father, if he were not guilty of lying or slandering, if he had
deceived neither gods nor men, nor oppressed his workmen in their daily
tasks, nor drawn off the water, if he had allowed no one to be hungry,
and caused no one to weep, if he were not slothful and idle in his
occupation, if he sacrificed to the gods at the appointed time, and
poured libations and observed all the regulations for cleanliness, then
he might hope to find grace in the presence of the twenty-four judges
before Osiris on the day of judgment in Amenti (p. 79). In order to gain
by such conduct and careful observation of the laws of cleanliness and
the ritual, a long life in this world, rest in the grave, and eternal
life in the fields of the sun-god, the Egyptians worshipped their gods
with unwearied zeal, while their kings raised temple upon temple of
enormous blocks in honour of the life-giving powers of heaven.

We cannot rate the knowledge and science of the Egyptians very low,
however absurd and singular much in it appears to be. The early
discovery of writing, however unwieldy the form, gave them the means of
preserving not only invocations and incidents, but also the results of
observation and experience, and of increasing slowly and surely their
stock of knowledge. They made an unusually extensive use of writing. The
walls of the temples are covered with inscriptions, which often enough
only repeat once more what has been repeated already innumerable times.
Even in the tombs at Beni Hassan from the time of the Amenemha and
Sesurtesen, we find scribes engaged in numbering the flocks and
ticketing the sacks of corn. The scribes of the king registered the game
obtained in hunting, the number of hands hewn off after a victory, and
of prisoners, and calculated the amount of the booty. The temple-scribes
are seen in the processions with pen in hand, and on the monuments the
gods note down the years of the kings on the leaves of the arbor vitæ.
Everything is to be enumerated, registered, and entered. Even ornaments
and utensils are covered with inscriptions. As the hieroglyphics on the
walls explained the images in the temples, and the hieroglyphics on the
sides of the sepulchral chambers recorded the race and achievements of
eminent persons and officers, so did the priests write down their
wisdom, and private people their documents on a lighter material, the
leaves of the papyrus, a tall reed growing in abundance in the swamps of
Egypt.

Notwithstanding this extensive use, the system of writing among the
Egyptians continued to the end a clumsy and difficult system, partly
owing to the number of pictures and symbols, and partly to the variety
of the phonetic pictures. The unchanging character of the Egyptians, the
symbolical and mystic sense concealed in the hieroglyphics, the
religious character of these old and sacred signs, stood in the way of
the change to a more simple and phonetic mode of writing. Yet the effort
to obtain such a system is unmistakable. After the year 1300 B.C. a
number of picture symbols were used as phonetic symbols, which up to
that time had no phonetic value, and this change becomes more and more
frequent in the last centuries B.C. The habit of writing the
hieroglyphics on the papyrus had early led to abbreviation in writing;
the pictures were represented by simple outlines more adapted to the
hand; and hence arose a cursive mode of writing the hieroglyphics, the
so-called "hieratic" writing, which we already (pp. 90, 94) found in use
on the pyramids under the old kingdom, and which was in use on an
extensive scale at the time when the new kingdom was at its height.
Finally, from the hieratic writing arose a third and more abbreviated
kind, the demotic, which represented the language of ordinary
intercourse and the national dialect. This was in existence when
Herodotus travelled in Egypt. Here we see the most marked effort to
avoid the ideographic element and picture signs, and to extend the use
of the phonetic symbols. Beside the remains of the picture symbols, the
demotic writing employs seventeen simple phonetic symbols and some fifty
symbols of syllables. The hieroglyphic and hieratic modes of writing are
called on the monuments the "writing of the gods," the demotic is "the
writing of the books." For us the difficulty of the hieroglyphics is
materially increased by the fact that the Coptic language in the form
accessible to us is removed by thousands of years from the form of words
represented by the hieroglyphics of the old and new kingdom. The forms
which we obtain from the records preserved in the demotic writing are
about midway between those in the hieroglyphics and the forms retained
in the Coptic translation of the Scriptures, and in some books of
liturgies, which belong to the first centuries A.D.[279]

In the circles of the priests the traditional invocations of the gods,
the rules for the proper conduct of sacrifices and feasts, for the pure
conversation which is the way to life and salvation in this world and
the next, were without doubt committed to writing at a very early
period. When gradually extended and continued, those writings grew into
a liturgical canon and ecclesiastical codex of religious and moral law,
and a comprehensive collection of all the wisdom known to the priests.
We learn that the Egyptian priests possessed forty-two sacred books.
Regarded as a collection of religious rules in every department of
civilisation and life, as the measure of holy and upright conversation,
and as rules of civil law, these books passed as the writings of the god
Thoth, the scribe of heaven, the god of truth and justice. The civil law
also was grounded upon the rules and axioms of religion; from these it
arose, and the books of civil law without doubt formed a part of the
sacred law, and of the books of the priests. Of these forty-two books
ten belonged to the high priest, of which eight may have been the eight
books of civil law (p. 202). In that case the two others would contain
the doctrine concerning the gods, and the instruction of the priests.
Ten other books belonged to the temple-scribe. Of these the first
contained the rules for the sacred writing; the second the geography
and cosmogony; the third and fourth the arrangement of the sun, moon,
and five planets; the fifth and sixth the description of Egypt and the
Nile; the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth, the weights and measures,
the mode of registering the temple furniture and property. Again, ten
books belonged to the chamberlain. These taught the ritual and the
liturgy, the offering of first-fruits and sacrifices, hymns and prayers,
together with the conduct of festivals and other things of the kind,
and, finally, discipline and the rules for examining the animals for
sacrifices. The two books of the minstrel contained the hymns and the
contemplation of the life proper for a king (p. 188). The four books of
the astrologer concluded the narrower circle of the sacred writings. Of
these, the first contained the arrangement of the fixed stars; the
second and third the coincidences of the orbits of the sun and moon; the
fourth, the rising of the constellations. Besides these sacred books the
pastophors (p. 196) had six books which taught the principles and
practice of medicine;[280] for the art of healing, _i.e._ of preserving
life, also belonged to the priests. The medicine of the Egyptians is
commended as early as the Homeric poems (p. 15). Herodotus assures us
that in Egypt every kind of sickness had a special physician, and
Diodorus states that the art was carried out strictly according to the
written principles, _i.e._ no doubt, according to these six sacred
books. A hieratic papyrus on the subject of medicine has been recently
found at Thebes, which is supposed to belong to the first centuries of
the restoration of the monarchy. A section of this deals with diseases
of the eye.[281] Egyptian physicians were much sought after in the East
(the founder of the Persian kingdom, Cyrus, procured an oculist from
Egypt), until the fame of the Greek medicine about 500 B.C. threw
Egyptian physicians into the shade.[282]

In the sacred books of the priests was drawn up the religious system
into which the original conceptions of the gods were shaped and
developed in the circles of the priests. The gods who passed for the
greatest and mightiest in the various districts out of which Egypt was
made up, the protecting deities of the separate localities, were here
arranged in definite ranks and classes. And if, nevertheless,
considerable differences can be observed in the teaching of the priests
of Memphis and Thebes, they are sufficiently explained by the mode in
which religion and state were developed in Egypt, and the rival position
of the two great centres of ecclesiastical life. According to the
doctrine of Memphis the seven highest deities were Ptah, the creative
god of light of the lower country; Ra, the sun-god of Heliopolis; and
Shu (Sosis, p. 50), the deity of the clear air; these three were
followed by the forms belonging to the Osiris circle, on whose nature
rested the moral basis of the life of the Egyptians; Seb, the father of
Osiris; Osiris himself; then his opposite, Typhon; and lastly, Horus,
the conqueror of Typhon.[283] The doctrine of Thebes placed Ammon at the
head instead of Ptah, and in the place of Ra stood the two sun-gods of
Upper Egypt, Tum (Atum, p. 51) and Mentu; these were followed by Shu,
and the gods of the Osiris circle. To the seven or eight great gods was
appended a circle of twelve gods, and among these Thoth and Anubis. The
twelve were followed by a number of spirits, genii and demigods. With
this system of gods the doctrine of the priests was connected. Even from
the attributes of Ptah, Neith, and other deities, it is clear that there
was among the priests a strong tendency to gather up the divine powers
into the forms of Ptah, Tum, Osiris, and Ra. The teaching of the priests
evidently desired to grasp the connection of life, and attain to a
theogony and a theory of creation. It has been already pointed out on
the authority of documents belonging to the times of the Amenemha and
Sesurtesen, that the priests in their doctrine were at pains to discover
the unity of the divine spirits, and to conceive the forms of the gods
as manifestations of one being. They regarded the animals as the
manifestations of special characteristics of the gods, and men as
phænomena of a divine origin and nature, who would return to the place
whence they came. To go further and grasp the heart of the system is
impossible in the present condition of our researches. Conceptions and
inferences of the Græco-Egyptian speculation of the time of the
Ptolemies and the first centuries after Christ cannot be accepted as the
true form of the old Egyptian religion, or as the doctrine of the
priests of ancient Egypt.

With the Egyptians, as with other nations, poetry probably arose out of
the invocations of the gods and hymns of praise and thanksgiving.
Religious poetry had a fixed canon in the books of the minstrels. That
national songs were also in vogue is shown by the monuments (p. 222).
Diodorus told us above that the achievements of Sesostris were
celebrated in poetry (p. 144). The description of a deed of arms of
Ramses II. which he must have regarded as of considerable importance
has been preserved. The battle he fought with the Cheta in the fifth
year of his reign (p. 152), he caused to be represented in the rock
temple at Abu Simbel and in the Ramesseum, and a description of it is
engraved in these temples, as at Luxor and Beth-el-Walli, and in the
walls of the great temple at Karnak. It is found in still greater detail
in a papyrus of the British Museum.[284] At the end is the observation
that the scribe Pentaur composed it in the seventh year of the reign of
Ramses II. In this poem we are told that the chief of the Cheta had come
with his archers and chariots, three men on each chariot. North-west of
Kadesh they lay in ambush. The king, urging on his chariot, pressed into
the midst of the miserable Cheta. He found himself surrounded by 2,500
chariots. "My bowmen and my chariots have abandoned me, this is what the
king said; none of them is here to fight beside me. What is the will of
my father Ammon? Is he a father who denies his son? Or have I followed
my own thoughts? Did I not set forth at thy command; has not thy mouth
led my armies, and thy counsel guided them? Have I not celebrated many
brilliant festivals, and filled thy house with booty? Thirty thousand
bulls I have sacrificed with odorous herbs and perfumes of all kinds. I
have built thee temples of stone, I bring obelisks from Elephantine, and
cause the everlasting stones to be carried down. For thee--the great
ships swim upon the sea, to bring thee the tribute of the nations. Has
the like been done before? Ruin on him who opposes thee: salvation to
him who comprehends thee, Ammon. On thee I call. I am alone before thee
in the midst of unknown nations. My bowmen and chariots left me when I
called; no one heard me when I cried for help. But I choose Ammon before
thousands of bowmen and millions of chariots. The devices of men are
nothing; Ammon will deliver from them. These words echoed in Hermonthis.
Ra comes to him who calls upon him. He reaches to thee his hand. He
flies to thee, Ramses Miamun. I am with thee, I am thy father, the sun,
and my hand is with thee. Their hearts shall waver in their breasts and
all their limbs shall fail. They shall not shoot their arrows; their
lances they shall not be able to hold. The chief of the Cheta sent
princes, the prince of Aratus (Aradus) and the prince of Kirkamischa
(Karchemish). My charioteer was weak, and a great terror came upon his
limbs. He said, Brave king, hold, and let us save the breath of our
lives. What can we do, noble lord, Ramses Miamun? Mark what his majesty
answered to his charioteer. Courage! Stablish thine heart, my
charioteer. Like the divine hawk, I will swoop into their midst, they
shall be overthrown and hewn down into the dust. Ammon were no god if he
glorified not my face before their countless hosts. The king pressed
into the midst of the miserable Cheta, six times he pressed into their
midst. My bowmen and charioteers came at the hour of evening from their
camp: they found the whole region covered with dead bathed in their
blood. His holiness answered his army and the captains who had not
fought. Ye did not well to leave me alone in the midst of the enemies. I
have fought, I have beaten back thousands of enemies, and I was alone.
The horses which drew me were 'Might in Thebes,' and 'Rest in the upper
land.' As soon as I am within my royal gates, I command that they have
corn every day before the god Ra. When the earth again became light, he
began the conflict again; he dashed into the battle like a bull, which
hurls himself upon geese, and with him the mighty lion beside his
horses. Rage inflamed all his limbs. They were hewn in pieces before his
mares. The chief of the miserable Cheta sent to call upon the great name
of his majesty. Thou art the sun, the god of both worlds, thou art
Sutech the great conqueror, the son of heaven. Baal is in all thy limbs.
Terror is upon the land of Cheta; thou hast possessed thyself of their
inwards for ever. The slave said, as he spoke to Pharaoh: Since Ammon
has granted to thee that Egypt and the nation of the Cheta shall be
slaves at thy feet, and Ra has granted thee the dominion over them, thou
canst slay thy slaves; they are in thy power; we lie bowed to the earth,
ready to obey thy command. O brave king, delight of the warriors, grant
us the breath of our lives! The king summoned his generals in order to
hear the message and write an answer, and toward midday he took ship. He
returned in peace with his army to Egypt. The whole earth has subjected
itself to his name, and the princes, lying on the ground, worship his
countenance."[285]

Not only certain turns in this description, but passages in invocations
which have come down to us, show that in expressing themselves, the
Egyptians, in spite of the predominant vein of reflection, were not
without force of imagination, or striking figures, or largeness and
vigour of conception. That they are not free from bombast, foolish
exaggeration, and incessant repetition, any more, or even so little, as
the other nations of the East, is proved more especially by the
inscriptions in the temples recording the mighty deeds of the kings. Our
knowledge of the manuscripts does not as yet allow us to pass a more
definite judgment. Yet it is beyond doubt that even in the centuries
immediately preceding the irruption of the Hyksos, under the Sesurtesen
and Amenemha, they were in possession of a written literature, that even
then the oldest parts of the "Book of the Dead" were not only in
existence, but already commentated upon, and that after the restoration
of the kingdom, beside the comprehensive books of the priests, and
manuscripts on medicine (p. 209), there was at any rate after the
fourteenth century B.C., and the reign of Ramses II., a literature of a
considerable extent. There is a second papyrus in existence by the
author of the description of the battle, of which the title runs,
"Beginning of the Rudiments of the Art of Letter-writing by the Scribe
Pentaur, composed in the 10th year of Ramses II."[286] The fifth letter
of this collection is addressed by Ameneman, the head of the keepers of
the archives of the treasure of the king, to Pentaur; it is said that
Pentaur has turned his back on the sacred writings, and applied himself
to agriculture. The farmer has to fear grubs and rats, sparrows and
locusts for his crops; and thieves too. Implements and horses wear out.
The scribes come and demand the taxes, and the neighbours are away and
busy with the harvest. On the other hand, the work of the scribe is the
highest of all, and the scribe has no taxes to pay.[287] On a third
papyrus a hymn, addressed by Ramses III. to Ammon, is said to have been
found.[288] A fourth has the name-shields of Sethos II. (p. 163). It is
a composition by a scribe of the name of Enna, and contains the story of
the fate of two brothers.[289] A fifth papyrus, which is also
attributed to the time of successors of Ramses II., has preserved a
collection of apothegms.[290] In a country which placed such importance
on preserving every incident, on enumerating, recording, and registering
everything, care must have been taken to record the series of the kings.
When the shepherds were driven out, the liberation from foreign dominion
would give a strong impulse toward the attempt to keep firmly before the
eyes the old days of independent Egypt. At the same time these attempts
must have met with serious hindrances. The destruction which came upon
numerous records and monuments of those old times, and the want of any
definite æra of chronology, made it difficult to obtain a really correct
order of succession, or a historical picture of the ancient period. The
historical truth of the writings, which, in spite of these difficulties,
were undertaken, as is shown by the monuments mentioned above, and the
Turin papyrus (p. 25), was still more seriously impaired by the fact
that the views of the priests were governed by the conception that the
course of certain periods was allotted to the world by the gods, and in
these periods the fortunes of Egypt had reached their fulfilment, and
would continue to reach it. We have already become acquainted with this
Sothis period (p. 29 ff). From the gods came life and the world. So the
gods were said to have reigned in person over Egypt, before the kings,
their divine successors, ruled over men. Hence the priests of Lower
Egypt commenced the reign of the seven great gods with the beginning of
a Sothis period. The seven great gods were followed by the twelve gods
of the second rank, Thoth, Anubis, Chunsu, &c., in reigns of gradually
diminishing length through a certain number of Sothis periods. According
to the scheme still preserved, Ptah reigned 9,000 years, and the last of
the gods only seventy years, so that on an average each occupies exactly
half a Sothis period, or 730 of our years. These nineteen gods were
followed by thirty demigods; to each of whom was allotted the twelfth
part of a Sothis period for a reign, so that the whole period of the
reign of the gods takes up twelve Sothis periods, or 17,520 years. After
this, according to some authorities, began the period of human rulers;
others allotted four Sothis periods, _i.e._ 5840 years, to another set
of demigods. Then followed, beginning like the rest with the beginning
of a Sothis period, the rule of human kings. This Sothis period
commenced either in the year 5702 B.C., or, according to the arrangement
of Lepsius, with the year 4242 B.C. This year, therefore, was the first
of the history of Egypt. To Menes the priests attached the long list of
names in one continuous series, without in the least regarding whether
the dynasties were contemporaneous or successive, whether they ruled in
Upper or Lower Egypt, over the whole land, or in certain districts only.
If we calculate the rule of the human kings from the first of the dates
given, the first Sothis period of men came to an end, according to the
canon of Manetho, in 4242 B.C.; the second in 2782 B.C. The third ended
in the time of Menephta I., in whose reign as a fact the Egyptian year
did again coincide with the natural year.[291]

The Egyptians were devoted more than other nations to the contemplation
of the heavens. The constellations announced to them the approach of the
inundation, its height, and its decline. Moreover, their religion was to
a great extent a worship of light and the sun, and as they plainly
perceived the influence of the stars on the country in the rise and fall
of the water, the increase and abatement of the heat, &c., it was
natural that they should ascribe to the constellations and the movements
of the heavenly bodies similar influences on the life and growth, the
happiness and misery, of mankind; and this belief must in turn have
contributed to the assiduous and accurate observation of the heavens.
"If anywhere," says Diodorus, "it is in Egypt that the most accurate
observation of the position and movements of the stars have been made.
Of each of these they have records extending over an incredible series
of years, the courses and positions of the planets also they have
accurately observed, and they can accurately predict the eclipses of the
sun and the moon."[292] Astronomical pictures are not uncommon on the
monuments belonging to the period after the expulsion of the Hyksos.
Fragments of a calendar of festivals from the time of Ramses II. are
found on a gateway of the Ramesseum. The outer walls of the temple at
Medinet Habu give a complete calendar of the festivals from the time of
Ramses III. In the tomb of Sethos I. are pictures and names of the five
divinities of the planets known to the Egyptians, Mercury, Venus (the
star of the Bennu, p. 69), Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; the same picture
is found on the roof of the astronomical hall in the Ramesseum at
Thebes, and on two pictures in the tombs of Ramses V. and IX. The
painting in the Ramesseum--though the circle of 369 cubits, which,
according to Diodorus, was once on the roof of the Ramesseum (p. 175),
is wanting, being removed by Cambyses--presents a complete map of the
Egyptian sky. The pictures in the tombs of the two kings give the rising
of the stars at intervals of a fortnight. In the tomb of Ramses IV. the
thirty-six Decan stars are given together with their deities.[293] The
importance placed by the Egyptian priests on the knowledge of the sky is
shown not only by the monuments, but also by the four books of the
astrologer, and the third and fourth books of the temple scribe; and
that their astronomical science was by no means slight is sufficiently
proved by their early establishment of a solar year of 360, and then of
365 days, and by the observation and establishment of the Sothis
periods. This fact is confirmed by the lists of the rising of the stars
already mentioned. Yet the astronomical knowledge of the priests of
Egypt cannot be placed beside that of the Babylonians. Representations
of the zodiac are not found on the monuments till the time of the
Ptolemies,[294] and Ptolemy, himself an Egyptian, has preserved for us
observations of the Chaldees, but none made by his own countrymen. The
greater part of the attention which the priests of Egypt bestowed upon
the heavens was given in the interests of astrology rather than
astronomy. As the months in the year belonged to certain gods, the first
to Thoth, the third (Athyr) to Hathor, the last to Horus, so the days
of the month had their deities. The first day belonged to Thoth, the
second to Horus, the third to Osiris, &c.; and lastly, every hour of the
day was allotted to a special influence. From the importance thus given
to the days and hours the astrologers could foretell the fortune of
life; they could ascertain what issue awaited any enterprise--whether
the day and hour were favourable or not for this or that occupation or
undertaking. For this object they possessed tables worked out in
extensive detail. For instance, anyone born on the 14th of Athyr, the
day when Typhon was said to have slain Osiris, had to expect a violent
death; anyone born on the 23rd of Phaophi was doomed to be killed by a
crocodile; and anyone born on the 27th of the same month, by a serpent.
On the other hand, a child born on the 9th of Phaophi might look forward
to a long life. In the tables of the hours we find for a given
day--first hour, Orion is lord of the left elbow; second hour, the Twins
have influence on the left ear; fifth hour, the Pleiads(?) are sovereign
over both chambers of the heart; tenth hour, the feet of the Swine
predominate over the left eye, &c.[295]

In the achievement won by Egyptian art the priests took a leading part.
The buildings of the temples and the tombs of the kings could only be
erected after their designs; for in these essentially sacred things,
sacred measures and numbers, were concerned, and, like architecture,
sculpture and painting were primarily employed in the service of
religion. As we might expect from the character of the people, the
architecture of the Egyptians aimed at the firm and durable. The
structures rise up simple in their lines, like the ridges of rock which
are the boundaries of Egypt, broad and massive. The pyramids, with great
simplicity of form, were found to display a considerable skill in
dealing with and uniting large masses of stone. Following this path, the
architecture of Egypt has always preserved a severity and simplicity of
outline even when employing richer forms and ornaments. Among the
Egyptians sculpture and painting never attained independence; it was
their vocation to support architecture, and assist her in preserving in
the stream of time the picture of the king, his sacrifices, and his
achievements, and this or that incident of his reign. The sculpture of
the Egyptians exhibits a vigorous attempt to grasp the forms in a naive,
but prosaic and merely intellectual manner; it preserves them free from
any fanciful use of symbols, and conceives the human form in fixed
proportions and characteristic expression of movement, while it is still
more happy in the form and character of the animals. Like architecture,
sculpture prefers to work in the hardest and most lasting material. But,
as in all other departments of life, so here; the type when once fixed,
the canon of proportion when once discovered, the mode of treatment and
the law of form is rigorously retained. With complete accuracy of
execution in the most difficult material, sculpture constantly repeats
the same figures, geometrical rather than natural in form. Yet in spite
of this typical character, in sculpture and painting, as in
architecture, a considerable development took place. The statues of the
times of the pyramids, the Amenemha and Sesurtesen, exhibit,
comparatively speaking, very correct forms, lively energy in the
expression of action, and a strong treatment of the muscles; but the
sculptures of the new kingdom are distinguished by greater variety of
forms, a larger wealth of lines, and a delicacy of outline; the drawing
of the figures is far more slender, and there is considerable grace in
the treatment of massive pillars and capitals. The Tuthmosis and
Amenophis, the Sethos, and the earliest Ramses, imposed upon Egyptian
art an almost oppressive number of tasks, and in performing them she
touched her highest point. But the amount of work must of itself have
introduced a more and more conventional treatment within the limits of
the typical circle in which sculpture moved; and at last this treatment
was content with mere precision of outlines. This is the character of
the sculpture of the times of Ramses III. down to the days of
Psammetichus, in which, by a truer imitation of nature, and greater
grace in the form of the bodies, it once more attained to a beautiful
after-growth.

The industry and skill with which the cultivation of the land and of the
vine, and the breeding of cattle and sheep, was carried on in Egypt even
before the invasion of the Hyksos, has been already seen on the
monuments of the time of the Sesurtesen and Amenemha (p. 118). The
fields were tilled with ploughs drawn by oxen, or with the hoe. It was
not in every case necessary to make furrows. In December and January,
when the water had run off, the seed was cast into the moist ground and
trodden in, as we see from the monuments, by sheep and goats. Everywhere
the overseer is in the field with the labourers and herdmen. By the end
of March harvest was ready; wheat and maize were cut with the sickle,
and then the grain was trodden out by oxen. Meanwhile the thrasher sang,
according to the inscription on a rock tomb at El Kab (above Thebes),
"Thrash for yourselves, oxen, thrash for yourselves; thrash bushels for
your masters."[296] Diodorus remarks that it was marvellous with what
care and skill the herds were tended by their keepers in Egypt, what
knowledge of healing plants and of food was to be found in these
keepers, how their occupation came to them from their forefathers, with
a large stock of experience and manual skill; and how their knowledge
increased to an incredible degree the propagation of the animals.[297]
On the monuments we find not only great herds of cattle, asses, sheep,
and goats, but also whole droves of hens, ducks, and geese.
Poultry-sellers and depots of poultry are often found. These sculptures
confirm the statements of Diodorus of the careful tending of the
animals; they also show us the medicinal treatment of ailing animals.
Beside this wealth of cattle, there was an abundance of fish, provided
by the Nile. These were caught partly with hooks, and partly with large
nets. The upper classes fished for pleasure. Yet most kinds of fish were
forbidden food: the priests, as we have seen, were not allowed to taste
fish at all.

The monuments also teach us that hunting was not neglected by the
Egyptians. Hares, foxes, antelopes, gazelles, hyænas, buffaloes, and
lions were driven into inclosures surrounded by nets, or chased with the
bow and arrow and dogs, or with the chariot and hounds. Gazelles and
buffaloes were also taken with the lasso; traps were set for the hyænas;
the hippopotamus was attacked with a spear from a boat.[298]

Of the industry of the Egyptians in trade we have already had striking
evidence in the monuments of the old kingdom. There we saw all kinds of
manufactures in the various stages; we found on them the simple
weaver's loom, which produced the robes of byssus, so highly valued in
antiquity,--the lasting fabric which may still be examined in the
clothing of mummies. The early development of technical skill meets us
more especially in the pictures of the preparation of glass on the tombs
at Beni Hassan. Glass cups and vessels are frequently found in the
tombs, and Strabo observes that the earth required for making glass is
among the products of Egypt.[299] The working of the copper mines in the
mountains of Sinai goes considerably further back than the date of the
tombs at Beni Hassan. They were open as early as the times of Snefru and
Chufu.[300] Yet by far the greatest proportion of hands must have been
employed upon the buildings of the kings and the tombs of the wealthy.
On the monuments we see the masons in all their various occupations;
painters and statuaries also are represented there in the different
moments of their work; and the tables of proportion which they followed
are still preserved.

Even before the invasion of the Hyksos, as we saw from the tombs at Beni
Hassan, the life of the wealthy Egyptian was surrounded by considerable
elegance (p. 118). The houses of the rich, built, according to the
pictures on the monuments, in a light and graceful style, in contrast to
the heavy structure of the temples, had several stories, and were
provided with the galleries and terraces still usual in the East. Houses
in the country had shady avenues of trees, planted in exact rows, and
neat beds of flowers, graceful pavilions, and fountains of water. The
common national dress was a linen shirt, and over it a woollen cloak;
the labourer and the lowest class had only an apron round the body; but
the clothing of the higher classes was choice and delicate. The women,
who enjoyed considerable freedom in Egypt, wore various
ornaments--necklaces, eardrops, and bracelets; rings of the most various
shape adorned almost every finger. Their hair was carefully dressed;
they bathed frequently, and made a considerable use of ointments. Life
was sociable in ancient Egypt. In the tombs at Beni Hassan we find men
carried in a palanquin to a social meeting; and in the tombs at Thebes
they are driving in chariots to a similar gathering. Gaily-dressed men
and women meet and converse with each other in the hall; slaves,
light-coloured and black, in part handsomely-dressed, hand them garlands
and cups. The table is spread. Bread, figs, and grapes are set out in
baskets, wine in glass bottles; vegetables and poultry are also there.
The solid food was eaten with the hand, liquids were taken with spoons.
At these banquets the Egyptians do not seem to have been very moderate.
Herodotus tells us that a small wooden image of a mummy was carried
round at their entertainments, with the exhortation, "Look on this,
drink and be merry. When dead, thou wilt be as this is!"[301] This
admonition was not without its results. In the pictures on monuments we
find not only men, but women, throwing up the surfeit of food and wine;
others are carried away home by their servants. Indeed, excess and
drunkenness are quoted among the forty-two chief sins of the Egyptians.
During the meal dancers were introduced, and bands of musicians, male
and female, who played on harps, guitars, and flutes; among which was
mingled the sound of the tambourine. A chorus also sang to the harp. The
company also played and danced.[302] We have already seen that games of
ball and mora were played under the old monarchy. Among the recreations
of the new monarchy draughts are found. We often find on the monuments
sketches of men and women who exhibit contortions of their bodies and
feats of strength. Sham-fights at sea also occur, and wrestling matches
are very common.

Proudly as the Egyptians, in the consciousness of their purity and
culture, looked down on "the unclean and perverse" nations outside their
land, and rarely as they travelled into other countries, Egypt was
nevertheless the centre of a considerable trade. China and Japan also
for a long time shut themselves up from the outer world, yet their trade
was considerable, though permitted only at certain fixed places. The
Egyptians also caused the products which they needed to be brought,
without themselves going to seek them. Egypt required wood for the
building of houses and ships, brass, ivory, slaves, and incense. Even
before the year 1500 B.C., Arabian caravans carried the products of the
south coast of Arabia to Syria and Egypt.[303] The wandering tribes of
Libya, Syria, and Arabia required corn, weapons, utensils, and
implements, which they could buy in Egypt. Then at a later period came
the trade of the Phenicians with Egypt. They could bring wood from the
forests of Lebanon--wine, oil, slaves, amber, and tin, and exchange them
for the manufactures of Egypt; for retail goods, glass, drugs, which
Egypt produced in great quantities, fish, Egyptian fabrics, linen, and
material prepared from the papyrus. The Greeks called fabrics made from
this plant, "byblian," from the city Byblus, a proof that they first
became acquainted with these Egyptian wares through the Phenicians, and
mainly through the ships of Byblus, and received them from this quarter.
Horses, also, and chariots were brought as articles of trade from Egypt
to Syria about the year 1000 B.C.; at that time a chariot cost in Egypt
600 shekels, and a horse 150.[304] So far as we can gather from the
legends of the Greeks, the trading ships could only enter the Canopic
mouth of the Nile, and intercourse with foreign merchants could only
take place on the little island of Pharos, opposite the city of Thonis.
Here the mariners of that day, the Phenicians, and with them, and after
them, the Ionians, carried on their trade with the Egyptians. On land
the only entrance was by Pelusium; and here as also at Pharos, an
entrance-tax had apparently to be paid. From the Homeric poems we may
conclude that there was then a trade with Egypt, and not only piratical
descents upon the coasts; but when the Ionians, about the middle of the
eighth century, began to enter into dangerous competition with the
Phenicians, the latter seem to have succeeded in getting the Greeks
excluded from Egypt, and obtaining for themselves the monopoly of the
sea--a privilege which, however, they did not maintain for more than a
century.[305]

Such was ancient Egypt, the land of marvel, whose richly developed
civilization lies on the threshold of historical life. Excellently
furnished by nature, and placed in a peculiarly favoured land, the Copts
have transferred to their own lives and civilization the grave and
solemn character of their sky and their country. Their conservative
feeling is directed towards fixed and unalterable order; the sons
repeat the lives of their fathers, and the nation is divided into
various classes and corporations, which carry on the same occupations
from generation to generation. The beneficent powers of nature, the
mystery of life, the life returning out of death--these are the forces
and laws which the Egyptians worshipped as their good gods, whose
creation is the fruitful world, who manifest themselves in good
creatures, whose unchangeable nature they seemed to recognise as
embodied in the instinctive and unalterable life of certain animals. The
life of the nation adapts itself also to priestly rules, which operate
without alteration, like the laws of nature.

As the heart of this people was set upon the continuance of the race and
occupation, on rule and law, so also was it their desire to prolong the
existence of the individual. This impulse towards the preservation of
self operated so strongly that the Egyptians busied themselves with the
future quite as much as with the past. It was this trait in their
character which caused the Egyptians to rescue their dead from
corruption, and occupied the living with the construction of "eternal
dwellings for the dead." This it was which made them a nation of
scribes, builders, painters and sculptors. These efforts culminate in
the buildings of the kings, who could command the whole powers of the
land in preserving their names. The Egyptians were loath to end with
death. It was the true vocation of every man worthily to build and
"adorn his tomb;" and the essential object of life is--not to lose the
everlasting life after death by unclean and unlawful conversation--to
win a return to the divine origin of life.

With the simple confidence of childhood, with the patient endurance of
a man, and with iron perseverance, the Egyptians attempted to redeem the
existence of man from destruction and decay, and rescue his life from
oblivion. The power of the Egyptians exhausted itself in this toil after
continuance of life. But however eager a man might be to preserve his
own individuality, he loses it in the presence of his ruler, who gathers
up in his own person the whole political life of the nation, and
exhausts it. Like a god, or an incarnate Destiny, the Pharaoh stands in
absolute supremacy over the land; "His countenance beams over Egypt as
the sun;" before him all distinctions fade away, and all bow down in
equal obedience. But even though the perishable was preserved, and made
as lasting as the rocks of the land--though in the ceremonial, the
ritual, and the rules of life the same unalterable constancy prevailed
as in the laws of nature, there was still room beside fixed prescription
and the will of the divine ruler for the vigorous pursuit of an industry
which was not far behind that of modern Europe, for an enjoyment of life
in the Oriental manner, which was not only social, but even luxurious
and sensual.

The efforts of the Egyptians to preserve themselves and their actions,
and to cause their names to live in the mouths of the generations after
them, have not been without a result. What the Greeks and Romans knew of
their history were traditions attached to the great monuments. Before
our researches the Egyptian nation has literally risen from the tomb;
the pyramids tell us the history of the old monarchy, and the temples at
Thebes the history of the new. Without these monuments the kings of
Manetho would have remained an empty and unintelligible echo. These
mountains of stone at the threshold of history, these chronicles of
hieroglyphics, this nation of mummies proclaim, beyond contradiction,
that nations do succeed in outliving themselves by their works, but also
that their life reaches only so far as their development.

FOOTNOTES:

[252] Diod. 1, 90.

[253] Thus, _e.g._ in the Rosetta inscription the order is given that in
every temple an image is to be set up to the "god Epiphanes, the avenger
of Egypt," to whom the principal deity of the temple presents the arms
of victory. Three times in every day the image of Epiphanes is to be
worshipped, and on the great festivals the same honours are to be paid
to him as to the rest of the gods. In addition, a special festival is
solemnized every year to the god Epiphanes, and a special order of
priests established for him. This resolution of the collected priests
was ordered to be engraved on hard stone and set up in all the temples
of the first, second, and third class. The full title of Epiphanes is:
"Son of Ptah, Beloved of Ammon and Ra, the Child of the Sun, the
Eternal."

[254] Diod. 1, 53; Plut. "De Isid." c. 6, 9; and below, p. 211 ff.

[255] Wilkinson, "Manners and Customs," Suppl. Pl. 76; Champollion,
"Lettres," p. 344 ff.

[256] In the inscriptions of the graves and sarcophagi of the Berlin
Museum; cf. Ebers, "Ægypten," s. 300.

[257] What Synesius (Op. p. 94) tells us of the election of the kings is
so astounding that it can hardly have been part of any plan of the
priests; the whole history of Egypt contradicts an elective monarchy of
such a kind. These supposed elections were said to have taken place on
the Libyan mountains, near Thebes; the priests mentioned the names of
the candidates for whom the votes were to be given. The votes of the
prophets had the value of one hundred, those of the lower priests of
twenty, of the servants of the temple of ten, and of the warrior class
of one.

[258] Kalasiris was the name given by the Egyptians to a linen coat,
with fringe round the thighs (Herod. 2, 81). The name Hermotybian has
been derived from [Greek: hêmitybion], a kind of apron.

[259] Herod. 2, 37.

[260] Diod. 1, 73, 74.

[261] Herod. 2, 37, 168.

[262] Genesis xlvii. 22, 26.

[263] Herod. 2, 109 _supra_, p. 143.

[264] Genesis xlvii. 24, 26.

[265] Herod. 2. 168.

[266] Genesis xlvii. 26.

[267] Even the land which the Pharaohs allotted to the temples with a
tax of a fifth belonged to them in a certain sense. We have tolerably
ancient records on papyrus, on which are given the incomes of the
temples, with the names of the tax-payers, and the things given in
taxation. When the Ptolemies ruled over Egypt the land which paid to the
temples belonged actually to the temples as property, but as property
revocable at will, and the kings on their side taxed the temples just as
the Islamite princes are accustomed to tax their mosques. In the Rosetta
inscription, under date March 27, 196 B.C., the prophets, upper priests,
chamberlains, pastophors, and scribes, explain that the king (Ptolemy
Epiphanes) had given an order that the incomes of the temples and the
land-taxes paid to them yearly, and the portions reserved for the gods
in the vineyards and other property, should continue to be paid. At the
same time we see from the sequel of this inscription, as well as from
other sources, that these incomes were not sufficient to keep the
temples in good order, and the king was compelled to make additions.
Yet, in any case, the Ptolemies by their state taxes withdrew from the
temples a portion of their incomes. From every plot of corn-land
([Greek: aroura]) the temples were to pay to the king an _artabe_ of
corn, and from every plot of vineyard an amphora of wine. Besides this,
they had to pay a money-tax and a certain amount of byssus cloth.

[268] Clemens ("Strom." p. 757 ff. ed. Pott) expressly says that the
prophet was the overseer of the temple; on the other hand, in the
inscription of Rosetta, the high priests and prophets stand side by
side.

[269] Herod. 2, 37, 143; Diod. 1, 73.

[270] Diod. 1, 80; Herod. 2, 37, 81; Diog. Laert. 8, 27; Porphyr. "De
abst." 4, 7.

[271] Diod. 1, 74, 92.

[272] Lepsius, "Briefe." s. 309, 310; Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 259.

[273] Herod. 2, 47; Aelian, "De Nat. An." 10, 16. As Herodotus tells us
that the swineherds married in their own order only, it follows that the
other orders married with each other. The attempt has often been made to
explain the so-called divisions of the Egyptians into castes by the
immigration of foreign tribes. This conception places in mechanical
layers what is really an organic development. In India such an
assumption has a certain historical foundation. There, there was a
servile class (the Sudra) under three superior classes; the first was
composed of the original inhabitants, the others of the Aryan
immigrants. This kind of division is wholly wanting in Egypt, and not
less so any historical or physiological foundation for the immigrations.
Strabo knows three orders only in Egypt; the priests, the soldiers, and
the population engaged in work or trades. Diodorus (1, 74) speaks of
five orders; _i.e._ in addition to the first two, husbandmen, artizans,
and shepherds. Plato ("Timæus," p. 21) mentions priests, soldiers,
artizans, shepherds, and hunters; Herodotus mentions priests, warriors,
cowherds, swineherds, merchants, interpreters, and mariners. In Plato
and Diodorus we miss the merchants, who certainly were not wanting in
Egypt, and in Herodotus the husbandmen and artizans. Nothing therefore
remains but the natural assumption that the labouring masses were
chiefly divided into shepherds, artizans, and husbandmen; and these were
again broken into many divisions according to their different vocations,
and each of our authorities has brought into prominence those
distinctions which especially came under his notice. As Herodotus
especially notices cowherds, we must suppose that those herdsmen are
probably meant who derived a living from the buffalo herds, which they
pastured in the swampy flats of the Delta, on the border of Egypt, and
lived in huts of reeds.--Diod. 1, 43.

[274] The number of provinces in Egypt under the old kingdom appears to
have been twenty-seven, according to the myth of the hewing of the body
of Osiris into twenty-seven pieces, and the distribution of them to all
the priests of the land for burial, which Diodorus has preserved. From
this may be derived the number of twenty-seven courts in the labyrinth
given by Strabo, p. 811, and twenty-five in Pliny, pp. 113, 114; as a
fact the building had only twelve courts. Yet Strabo mentions thirty-six
provinces (p. 787). Later coins give forty-six provinces, and Ptolemy
forty-seven. Forty-four nomes, twenty-two for Upper Egypt and as many
for Lower Egypt, can be established, together with their
names.--Brugsch, "Hist. d'Egypte," p. 9.

[275] Diod. 1, 73, 75, 94; Herod. 2, 136; Plut. "De Isid." 10; Chabas,
"Mél." 3, 10.

[276] Diod. 1, 77 ff.

[277] Herod. 2, 37, 38, 39, 65; Genesis xliii. 32.

[278] Herod. 2, 77, 85; Diod. 1, 84, 91.

[279] Lepsius, "Aelteste Texte," s. 10; Brugsch, "Grammaire démotique."

[280] Clem. Alex. "Strom." p. 758, ed. Pott; cf. Diod. 1, 49.

[281] Ebers, "Augsburger Allg. Zt." 1873. On a papyrus of a medicinal
character of the period from the twentieth to the twenty-second dynasty,
see Birch, "Zeitschrift für ægyptische Sprache," 1871, s. 61.

[282] Herod. 2, 84, 3, 1.

[283] Lepsius, "Götterkreis," s. 30; Bunsen, "Ægypten," 5, 1, 189 ff.

[284] Papyrus, Sallier III.

[285] De Rougé, "Recueil de Travaux," 1, 3 ff.; Chabas, "Revue Archéol."
1875.

[286] On the papyrus Sallier I.; "Revue Archéol." 1860, 2, 241.

[287] Goodwin-Chabas, _loc. cit._ 1861, 4, 118 ff.

[288] _Loc. cit._ 1860, 1, 357.

[289] De Rougé, _loc. cit._ 1852. On another very marvellous narrative
on a papyrus in the demotic character, see Brugsch, _loc. cit._ 1867,
16, 161 ff. This papyrus Brugsch, on paleographical grounds, places in
the third or second centuries B.C.

[290] Lauth, "Sitzungsberichte der Akademie, zu München," 1872, 347 ff,
and his "Abhandlung über den papyrus Sallier II. und Anastasi III.;"
_ibid._ p. 29 ff.; cf. Chabas, "Voyage d'un Egyptien," and Goodwin,
"Saneha."

[291] Boeckh, "Manetho und die Hundsternperiode;" Lepsius,
"Chronologie," s. 470 ff. and _supra_, p. 40.

[292] Diod. 1. 81.

[293] Brugsch, "Zeitschrift d. d. M. S." 10, 662 ff.

[294] The Egyptians then compared certain constellations in their
spheres with the signs of the zodiac. The Crab they denoted by the
scarabæus, the Lion by the knife, the Scales became the "sun-mountain,"
the Scorpion became the snake. The Kid was with them "the life," the
Ram "the slain" &c.--Brugsch, _loc. cit._

[295] Champollion, "Lettres," p. 239; Lepsius, "Chronologie," s. 109,
110; cf. _supra_, p. 58.

[296] Champollion, "Lettres," p. 196.

[297] Diod. 1, 74.

[298] Wilkinson, "Manners and Customs," 3, 4.

[299] Strabo, p. 758; cf. p. 147.

[300] _Supra_, p. 94; Ebers, "Durch Gosen," s. 135 ff.

[301] Herod. 2, 78.

[302] Wilkinson, "Manners and Customs," 2, 132.

[303] Cf. _infra_, Book II. cap. 3.

[304] 1 Kings x. 28, 29; 2 Chronicles i. 16, 17; ix. 28.

[305] "Od." 14, 288; 4, 225, 355; 17, 448; Movers, "Phoenizier," 2, 70.




BOOK II.

THE SEMITIC NATIONS.




THE SEMITIC NATIONS.




CHAPTER I.

THE ANCIENT KINGDOM OF BABYLON.


The neighbours of Egypt on the east were the Syrians and Arabians.
Herodotus gives the name of Syrians to the inhabitants of the Syrian
coasts and Mount Lebanon, the settlers on the Euphrates and Tigris, and
the population of the eastern districts of Asia Minor. In Xenophon the
Babylonians speak Syriac. Strabo remarks that the Syrians and Arabians
are closely related in language, mode of life, and physique--that
Syrians dwelt on both sides of the Taurus--that the same language was
spoken on both sides of the Euphrates--that Babylon and Nineveh were
cities of the Syrians--that the Assyrian kingdom was a kingdom of
Syrians, and that the inhabitants of the kingdom of Babylon and Nineveh
were called Syrians by their own historians.[306] As a fact tribes
closely related in language and nature--which we denote by the general
term Semitic--invaded with their armies the broad steppes of Arabia, and
the Syrian desert, occupied the coasts of Syria and a part of Asia
Minor, and inhabited the district of the Euphrates and Tigris, from the
mountains of Armenia to the Persian Gulf on the south, and the tableland
of Iran on the east. The languages of the Arabians, the Semitic tribes
of the south, the Aramæans and Canaanites in the west, and the
Babylonians and Assyrians in the east, are three ramifications springing
from one and the same stem of language, which spreads from the Black Sea
and the Mediterranean to the Arabian and Persian Gulfs. Living under
different conditions, the Semitic nations attained to different degrees
of civilization. The tribes of the desert did not go beyond the simplest
and most primitive forms, at which point a considerable portion of them
still remain; but the inhabitants of more favoured districts developed
independently, and in the course of time these developments operated on
each other, and thus led to a far more varied, and, in certain
directions, far more vigorous culture, than the isolated, exclusive, and
self-concentrated civilization of Egypt.

The two rivers which determine the character and nature of the
depression between the Syrian plateau and the tableland of Iran rise at
no great distance from each other on the mountains of Armenia. The
Euphrates rises to the north, the Tigris to the south. After leaving the
mountains of Armenia--the Euphrates, by a broad circuit to the west, the
Tigris by a direct course to the south--both rivers enter a tolerably
lofty steppe, where the uniform surface is broken by ridges of rock, by
ranges of hills, pastures, and fruitful strips of land, while the banks
of the rivers are overgrown with forests of plane-trees, tamarisks, and
cypresses, and shut in by meadows. As the soil becomes more level, these
fruitful depressions by the rivers become somewhat broader, but the land
between the streams becomes more sterile and treeless, and supports
only nomad tribes and herds of wild asses, ostriches, and bustards.[307]
When the Euphrates has left behind the last spurs of this desolate hill
country, at the place where the two rivers approach each other most
nearly--about 400 miles from their mouths--there commences a plain of
brown rich soil. Through this the Euphrates passes with a quiet stream,
but the Tigris hurries to the sea down a bed which is both narrower, and
often inclosed by rocks, while at the same time the river is increased
by copious additions from the western edge of the tableland of Iran. In
spite of the excellent soil this flat would remain unfruitful unless the
two rivers, year by year, when the snow melted on the Armenian
mountains, overflowed their banks, and thus irrigated the land for the
summer. In the Tigris the inundation commences about the beginning of
June, in the Euphrates, whose sources lie far higher, about the
beginning of July. But this inundation does not take place nearly so
calmly and regularly as that in the Nile. Instead of fertilising water,
the Tigris often sends down destructive floods over the plain, and
changes it, down to the marshy Delta at the mouth, into a broad and
rolling sea.

By its simple structure and the absence of any internal limitations,
this low-lying land on the Euphrates and Tigris was favourable to the
development of great kingdoms, and was hardly behind the Nile in
incentives and instigations to a civilised life. The writers of
antiquity celebrate the fruitfulness and natural wealth of these flats.
While on the other side of the Euphrates, so writes a Babylonian
historian of his own home, the land as far as Arabia is without water
and fruits, and on the other side of the Tigris the land is indeed
fruitful but rocky; in the land between the streams wheat and barley,
linseed beans and sesame grow wild; both in the marshes and the reeds of
the river nourishing roots are found in abundance, as valuable for food
as barley. Besides these there are dates, and apples, and other
different fruits, and abundance of fish and birds in the marsh and on
the land. Herodotus commends the wealth of the land in wheat and palms
in the strongest terms; Xenophon speaks in admiration of the size and
beauty of the dates.[308] Even now the palm-forests which run without
interruption along the lower course of both rivers produce dates in
abundance, and with their slender forms and lofty tops give a
picturesqueness to the otherwise uniform landscape. This vigorous
vegetation, together with the peculiar character of the land, must have
early incited a capable population to a regular cultivation and a higher
civilization. The protection of the land against the rapid overflow, the
conducting of the water to the higher districts, and the removal of
water from the marshes, must have led to measures calculated to produce
and develop a fertility of technical resources. Basins were required of
more considerable extent, longer canals, and stronger dams against the
violent inundations, and more extensive conduits, in order to convey the
water into the middle of the land, than were necessary in Egypt. Long
before Egypt had reached the height of her power and prosperity under
the Tuthmosis and Amenophis and the early Ramessids, the inhabitants of
this plain had attained to a peculiar culture and civilisation.

The accounts which the Greeks have handed down to us of the fortunes of
these districts in ancient times are meagre and defective. The power of
the Semitic empires on the Euphrates and Tigris had fallen long before
inquisitive Greeks penetrated the East, and the Persians, who were the
rulers at that time, had little interest in instructing the Greeks in
the former splendour of their opponents and ancient masters. Herodotus
intended to write the history of the Assyrians; if ever composed, it has
not come down to our times. On the other hand, he has described the
land, manners, and customs of the Babylonians; of their history,
however, he only tells us that many kings and two queens ruled over
Babylon.[309] Aristotle remarks that in Babylon astronomical
observations were said to exist extending back 31,000 years from the
time of Alexander the Great.[310] Diodorus tells us that the priests of
Babylon declared that they had observed the heavens for 473,000 years.
Cicero speaks of the shamelessness of the Chaldæans in boasting that
they possessed records for more than 470,000 years. Julius Africanus
gives 480,000 years, and Pliny even 720,000 years as the period for
which observations of the heavens burnt upon tiles were in
existence.[311]

About the time when Manetho compiled his list of Egyptian sovereigns,
under the rule of Antiochus Soter (281-262 B.C.) Berosus, a priest of
the temple of Bel at Babylon, composed a history of his country in Greek
in three books.[312] Only a few fragments of this work have come down to
us. Berosus commenced with the creation of the world. "Once all was
darkness and water. In this chaos lived horrid animals, and men with
two wings, and others with four wings and two faces, and others again
with double organs male and female. Others had the thighs of goats, and
horns on their heads; others had horses' feet, or were formed behind
like a horse and in front like a man. There were bulls with human heads,
and horses and men with the heads of dogs, and other animals of human
shape with fins like fishes, and fishes like sirens, and dragons, and
creeping things, and serpents and wild creatures, the images of which
are to be found in the temple of Bel. Over all these ruled a woman of
the name of Omorka. But Bel divided the darkness and clove the woman
asunder, and of one part he made the earth, and of the other the sun and
moon and planets, and he drew off the water,[313] and apportioned it to
the land, and prepared and arranged the world. But those creatures could
not endure the light of the sun, and became extinct. When Bel saw the
land uninhabited and fruitful, he smote off his head and bade one of the
gods mingle the blood which flowed from his head with earth, and form
therewith men and animals and wild creatures, who could support the
atmosphere. A great multitude of men of various tribes inhabited
Chaldæa, but they lived without any order, like the animals. Then there
appeared to them from the sea, on the shore of Babylonia, a fearful
animal of the name of Oan. Its body was that of a fish, but under the
fish's head another head was attached, and on the fins were feet like
those of a man, and it had a man's voice. Its image is still preserved.
The animal came at morning and passed the day with men. But it took no
nourishment, and at sunset went again into the sea, and there remained
for the night. This animal taught men language and science, the
harvesting of seeds and fruits, the rules for the boundaries of land,
the mode of building cities and temples, arts and writing, and all that
pertains to the civilisation of human life."[314]

The first sovereign of Babylon was Alorus, a Chaldæan of the city of
Babylon, whom the god had himself pointed out to the nation as a
shepherd. His reign continued for 36,000 years. After the death of
Alorus, his son Alaparus ruled for 10,800 years. He was succeeded by
Almelon from the Chaldæans, of the city of Sippara, for 46,800 years,
and Almelon by Ammenon, a Chaldæan of the same city for 43,200 years.
Under his rule there came out of the sea an animal, combining, like Oan,
the shape of a fish and a man, and called Idotion.[315] After Ammenon
came Amegalarus, of the city of Sippara, for 64,800 years, and after him
Daonus, also from Sippara, for 36,000 years. In his reign there again
appeared from the Red Sea four animals in the shape of men and fish.
These were Euedokus, Eneugamus, Eneubulus, and Anementus. Daonus was
followed by Edorankhus, from Sippara, who ruled for 64,800 years, and in
his time appeared another monster of the same kind, named Odakon. These
explained in detail what Oan had given in the sum. After Edorankhus came
Amempsinus, a Chaldæan of Larancha for 36,000 years,[316] and after him
Otiartes (Ubaratulu),[317] a Chaldæan of the same city for 28,000 years.
Otiartes was followed by his son Xisuthrus who reigned 64,800 years.

From the first year of Alorus to the last year of Xisuthrus 432,000
years had elapsed. "In this year the god Bel revealed to Xisuthrus in a
dream that in the fifteenth year of the month Daësius there would be a
great storm of rain, and men would be destroyed by the flood of waters.
He bade him bury all written records, the ancient, mediæval, and modern,
in Sippara, the city of the sun, and build a ship and embark in it with
his kindred and nearest friends. He was also to take food and drink into
the ship, and carry into it all creatures winged and four-footed.
Xisuthrus did as he was bidden, and built a boat fifteen stadia
long,[318] and two stadia in breadth, and placed in it his wife and
child, his relations and friends. Then the inundation came. When the
rain ceased, Xisuthrus sent out some birds, but they returned back to
the ship, as they could find nothing to eat and no place of rest. After
a few days he sent out other birds. These also returned, but with mud on
their feet. Then Xisuthrus sent yet others, and they never returned.
Xisuthrus knew that the earth had appeared. He took out a part of the
roof of his boat, and perceived that it had settled down on a mountain.
Then he went out with his wife and daughter and the architect of the
boat. He worshipped the earth, and built an altar, offered sacrifice to
the gods, and then disappeared together with those whom he had brought
out of the boat. When his companions, whom he had left in the boat, had
gone out, and were in search of Xisuthrus, his voice called to them out
of the air, saying that the gods had carried him away in reward for his
piety; that he with his daughter and the architect were dwelling among
the gods. But the others were to return from Armenia, where they then
were, to Babylon, and, in obedience to the command of the gods, dig up
the books buried at Sippara, and give them to mankind. They obeyed these
instructions. They sacrificed to the gods, and returned by land to
Babylon. They dug up the sacred books, erected many cities and temples,
and rebuilt Babylon. On the Gordyæan mountains, where it settled,
remains of the boat of Xisuthrus were in existence for a long time
afterwards.[319] In Lucian Xisuthrus is called Sisythes; and he with
wives and children is said to have escaped, in the great ark, the flood
which destroyed everything else.

After the flood Euexius reigned over the land of the Chaldæans for 2,400
years. He was followed by his son Chomasbelus, who reigned 2,700 years;
and after him came eighty-four kings, who, if we reckon in the reigns of
Euexius and Chomasbelus, ruled for 34,080 years.[320] Then the Medes
gathered together an army against Babylon, and took the land, and set up
tyrants from among their own people. These, eight in number, reigned
over Babylon for 234 years. After that eleven kings reigned for 248
years; then followed the Chaldæans, with forty-nine kings, who ruled
over Babylon for 458 years. These were followed by nine Arabian kings
for 245 years, and then came forty-five Assyrian kings for 526 years.
These were followed by Sennacherib, Asordan, Samuges, and his brother,
and afterwards by Nabopolassar. After Nabopolassar, Nabukudurussar
(Nebuchadnezzar) and his successor reigned for sixty-seven years.[321]

Such is the essential information contained in the fragments of Berosus
which have come down to us. They give us a tolerably clear view of the
system of cosmogony set up by the priests of Babylon, of the way in
which order and civilisation arose among men by successive revelations
from divine creatures coming out of the sea, and a sketch, though a very
meagre one, of the dynasties which reigned over Babylon down to the time
of Cyrus. The enormous number of 432,000 years, which the fragments
allot to the ten rulers of the first dynasty, and the 34,080 years of
the second dynasty, which came immediately after the flood, show that
the statements of Diodorus, Cicero, and Pliny are not mere imagination,
though these totals are perhaps scarcely intended to give the period
during which observations were made by the Chaldæans, but the antiquity
ascribed by the Babylonian priests to the existence of the world before
and after the flood.

Accounts of the great flood are also to be seen on tablets, copied from
old Babylonian originals, which have been discovered in the ruins of the
palace of Assurbanipal, king of Assyria. Disregarding the strange
beginning, and still stranger close, we find on these tablets that the
god Hea had commanded Sisit (Xisuthrus) of Surippak to build a ship, so
many cubits in length, breadth, and height, and to launch it on the
deep, for it was his intention to destroy sinners. "When the flood
comes, which I will send, thou shalt enter into the ship, and into the
midst of it thou shalt bring thy corn, thy goods, thy gods, thy gold
and silver, thy slaves male and female, the sons of the army, the wild
and tame animals, and all that thou hearest thou shalt do." Sisit found
it difficult to carry out this command, but at last he yielded, and
gathered together all his possessions of silver and gold, all that he
had of the seeds of life, and caused all his slaves, male and female, to
go into the ship. The wild and tame beasts of the field also he caused
to enter, and all the sons of the army. "And Samas (the god of the sun)
made a flood, and said: I will cause rain to fall heavily from heaven;
go into the ship, and shut to the door. Overcome with fear, Sisit
entered into the ship, and on the morning of the day fixed by Samas the
storm began to blow from the ends of heaven, and Bin thundered in the
midst of heaven, and Nebo came forth, and over the mountains and plains
came the gods, and Nergal, the destroyer, overthrew, and Adar came forth
and dashed down: the gods made ruin; in their brightness they swept over
the earth. The storm went over the nations; the flood of Bin reached up
to heaven; brother did not see brother; the lightsome earth became a
desert, and the flood destroyed all living things from the face of the
earth. Even the gods were afraid of the storm, and sought refuge in the
heaven of Anu; like hounds drawing in their tails, the gods seated
themselves on their thrones, and Istar the great goddess spake. The
world has turned to sin, and therefore I have proclaimed destruction,
but I have begotten men, and now they fill the sea, like the children of
fishes. And the gods upon their seats wept with her. On the seventh day
the storm abated, which had destroyed like an earthquake, and the sea
began to be dry. Sisit perceived the movement of the sea. Like reeds
floated the corpses of the evil-doers and all who had turned to sin.
Then Sisit opened the window, and the light fell upon his face, and the
ship was stayed upon Mount Nizir, and could not pass over it. Then on
the seventh day Sisit sent forth a dove, but she found no place of rest,
and returned. Then he sent a swallow, which also returned, and again a
raven, which saw the corpses in the water, and ate them, and returned no
more. Then Sisit released the beasts to the four winds of heaven, and
poured a libation and built an altar on the top of the mountain, and cut
seven herbs, and the sweet savour of the sacrifice caused the gods to
assemble, and Sisit prayed that Bel (El) might not come to the altar.
For Bel (El) had made the storm and sunk the people in the deep, and
wished in his anger to destroy the ship and allow no man to escape. Adar
opened his mouth and spoke to the warrior Bel (El): Who would then be
left? And Hea spoke to him: Captain of the gods, instead of the storm,
let lions and leopards increase, and diminish mankind; let famine and
pestilence desolate the land and destroy mankind. When the sentence of
the gods was passed, Bel (El) came into the midst of the ship and took
Sisit by the hand and conducted him forth, and caused his wife to be
brought to his side, and purified the earth, and made a covenant, and
Sisit and his wife and his people were carried away like gods, and Sisit
dwelt in a distant land at the mouth of the rivers."[322]

The correspondence to the Hebrew tradition of the flood, the coincidence
of certain points, and striking contrast of others, both in the
narrative of Berosus and in this account of the great flood, need not be
pointed out. In number, at any rate, the ten kings whom Berosus places
before the flood correspond to the ten patriarchs from Adam to
Noah.[323] In Berosus the boat of Xisuthrus lands in Armenia on the
mountains of the Gordyæans; Noah's ark landed on the mountains of the
land of Ararat. Like Sisit, Xisuthrus builds an altar and offers
sacrifice; when he has left the boat he disappears, and bids his
followers return to Chaldæa. They obey, and rebuild Babylon. Noah, after
leaving the ark, builds an altar to the Lord and offers burnt sacrifice,
and concludes the new covenant with Jehovah. Then Noah became a
husbandman, and lived for three hundred and fifty years after the flood;
but when the generations of his sons "journeyed from the East, they
found a plain in the land of Shinar, _i.e._ in Babylonia, and there they
dwelt and built the city called Babylon."[324] It is clear that these
legends formed an ancient common possession of the Semitic tribes of the
lands of the Euphrates and Tigris. In the Scriptures of the Hebrews we
find this in a purified and deepened form. The reason for the legend of
the flood is found in the nature of the land of Babylon. As has been
remarked, it is inundated yearly; it is also occasionally desolated by
fierce floods, which change the whole of the lower land as far as the
sea into a broad sheet of water. Similar legends are found in all
regions exposed to floods, in Armenia, Thessaly, Boeotia, and in
India.

Let us now attempt to ascertain what may be gained historically from the
fragments of Berosus. The seven Fish-men rise out of the sea of
Babylonia, i.e., out of the Persian Gulf. They teach language,
agriculture, the building of temples and cities, and writing; and what
the first gave in general terms the others expound in detail. Hence it
would appear that civilisation, culture, and writing came to the
Chaldæans from the south, from the shore of the Persian Gulf. The
sevenfold revelation points to the seven sacred books of the priesthood,
of which the last six explained by special rules the doctrine contained
in the first. The fragments lay especial weight on the fact that the
sacred books were already in existence before the flood, were saved from
it, and again dug up at Sippara. Pliny remarks that the mysteries of the
Chaldæans were taught at Sippara.[325] Beside this city (the site is
marked by the mounds at Sifeira, above Babylon, on the Euphrates) the
fragments mention Larancha and Babylon. The first two kings before the
flood were Chaldæans of Babylon, the next five, Chaldæans of Sippara,
the last three, Chaldæans of Larancha. If we set aside the time before
the flood, we find that the first dynasty of eighty-six kings after the
flood reigned for 34,080 years; more than 5,000 years are allotted to
the first two kings; and about 29,000 are left for the remaining
eighty-four. Looking at these numbers, and remembering that the
Babylonians reckoned by certain cycles of years, sosses of 60 years,
neres of 600, and sares of 3,600, we may suppose that the priests
brought the times before and after the flood into a certain number of
sares. The 432,000 years before the flood make up 120 sares (the 720,000
years of Pliny would make 200 sares). The period after the flood may
have been fixed at a tenth part of that sum, _i.e._, at 12 sares, or
43,200 years. The 34,080 years allotted to the first dynasty after the
flood do not come out in any round number of sares. If we suppose that
these cycles were first instituted after Babylon had succumbed to the
attack of Cyrus, and that the fall of Babylon before his arms coincided
with the end of the tenth sarus after the flood, then of the 36,000
years, which, according to the opinion we ascribe to the Babylonian
priests, had elapsed from the flood to the conquest of Babylon in the
year 538 B.C., 34,080 belong to the mythical dynasty after the flood,
and 1,920 years are left for the historical times down to this date. The
taking of Babylon is a known date, and if to it we add 1,920 years, we
get the year 2458 B.C. as the first year of the historical period. The
first ruler of the third dynasty of Berosus began to reign in the year
2458 B.C.[326] The same result and number of years comes out if we add
up the separate items in the dynasties, given in the fragments, from the
year 538 B.C. to the first king of the third dynasty, and leave out of
sight the very striking fact that the fragments break off the Assyrian
dynasty before Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Samuges, who certainly
belong to it, and fill up the chasm thus made in the succession of
dynasties by the 140 years which the canon of Ptolemy show to have
preceded the accession of Nebuchadnezzar--a canon which has no
historical object in view, no dynasties to tabulate, but is merely
intended to fix the years from which observations made by the Chaldæans
were in existence. If this is the right method[327] of ascertaining the
first established starting-point for the history of the lower land upon
the two streams, the beginnings of civilisation in these districts may
be placed not much below the year 3000 B.C. Life must have become richer
in Babylonia before the tribes of the Iranian uplands were roused to
obtain the sovereignty of that country. Still it remains a remarkable
fact that the history of Babylonia begins with the dominion of
strangers, and that the native tradition, as we can show from the
fragments of it remaining to our times, had nothing to place before the
strangers, except the two mythical dynasties of Babylonian princes
before and after the flood. In the fragments the first native dynasty of
historical times, the dynasty of the Chaldæan princes, comes in the
fifth place; according to the calculation given above, their supremacy
began in the year 1976 B.C., and already in 1518 B.C. it gave place
first to the nine Arabian, and then to the Assyrian kings. The statement
of the fragments, that forty-nine native kings reigned, in the 458 years
from 1976 B.C. to 1518 B.C., is also remarkable, since it allows for the
reign of each of the kings of this dynasty the brief average of a little
more than nine years.

But perhaps the Scriptures of the Hebrews, and the monuments of
Babylonia and Assyria, present sufficient material to supplement these
meagre results in the way of confirmation or contradiction? According to
Genesis, the sons of Shem, the eldest son of Noah, were "Elam and
Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram." And the eldest son of Ham,
Noah's second son, was Cush, and Cush begat Nimrod; the same "began to
be a mighty one in the earth, and the beginning of his kingdom was
Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar."[328]
From this we see not only the close relationship between the Hebrews and
the population of Mesopotamia, but also the precedence in high antiquity
allowed by the Hebrews to the tribes of the Tigris and Euphrates. The
Hebrews derived their own origin from Noah, Shem, and Arphaxad; but
before Arphaxad they place the two elder sons of Shem, Elam and Asshur.
The first is the representative of the nation and land of Elam on the
lower Tigris, while Asshur represents the Assyrians of the upper Tigris.
But, strangely enough, the Babylonians were not reckoned in the
generations of Shem, although, as we know perfectly well, the Chaldæans
were Semitic, and spoke a Semitic language closely resembling Hebrew. On
the contrary, the founding of the kingdom of Babylon is ascribed to
another stock, the eldest son of Cush, and grandson of Ham. As Genesis,
like the Hebrews of later date, includes under the name of Cush the
nations dwelling to the south, the Nubians, Ethiopians, and tribes of
South Arabia, we may here take the son of Cush, who founded Babylon, to
represent a southern tribe, dwelling perhaps on the shore of the Persian
Gulf. Thus as the fragments of Berosus derive the civilisation of
Babylon from the south sea and the south, so also does Genesis point to
a southern origin for Babylonia. And at the same time Genesis calls a
tribe dwelling on the lower Tigris, between the river and the mountains
of Iran, the Elamites, the oldest son of Shem. Among the Greeks the land
of the Elamites was known as Kissia, and afterwards as Susiana, from the
name of the capital. It was also called Elymais, and, in the
inscriptions of the Achæmenids, Uwazha. The Greeks describe this
district as a hot but very fruitful plain, well watered by the
tributaries of the Tigris from the mountains of Persia. There the land
brought forth two or even three hundredfold. According to Strabo the
land was inhabited by two tribes, the Kissians and Elymæans. The chief
city, Susa, lay between the Shapur and Dizful.[329] With the Greeks it
passed as the fortress of Memnon, the son of the Dawn, who came to the
aid of the Trojans in their distress--"the ancient mighty city," as
Æschylus calls it.[330] The inscriptions of the Assyrian kings give us
some information of the fortunes of the kingdom of Elam, which is not
contradicted by such isolated indications as we can gather from the
inscriptions of Babylonia. This evidence shows that in Elam from the
year 2500 B.C. a political constitution was in existence, and that the
kings of Elam invaded Babylonia before the year 2000 B.C., and about
this time ruled over Babylonia and Mesopotamia as far as Syria. Hence
before the year 2000 B.C. there was some kind of constitution in
Babylonia, and, as we shall see, it was accompanied by a certain amount
of culture. The dominion of Elam over Babylon was of short duration, and
Babylon soon recovered her independence. When, about the year 1500 B.C.,
Assyria rose into an independent state, and her power, after 900 B.C.,
became dangerous to the neighbouring states--when Babylonia, after the
middle of the eighth century B.C., was no longer a match for
Assyria,--Elam continued to maintain her independence in spite of
numerous attacks from the Assyrians.

It was not till the subjection of Babylonia was complete that the
Assyrian king Assurbanipal succeeded in reducing Elam, and in
taking and destroying Susa, the ancient metropolis of the country.
In his inscriptions this king of Assyria informs us that King
Kudur-Nanchundi[331] of Elam laid his hand on the temples of Accad (p.
257); two neres, seven sosses, and fifteen years,--_i.e._, 1,635 years
previously, he carried away the image of the goddess Nana. He
(Assurbanipal) brought her back; on the first of the month Kisallu
(Kislev) the goddess was conducted back to Erech (p. 237); in Bithiliana
he built for her a lasting sanctuary. As Elam was not completely subdued
by Assurbanipal till the year 645 B.C., we may place the recovery of the
statue of Nana in this year.[332] Hence the date of Kudur-Nanchundi of
Elam, whom an inscription of Susa calls the son of Sutruk-Nanchundi,
would fall in the year 2280 B.C., and if about this time it was possible
to carry away images of gods from Babylonia, we cannot place the
beginnings of civilisation in Babylonia later than the year 2500 B.C.
Tiles found at Mugheir, at no great distance from the mouth of the
Euphrates in Babylonia, belong to a second king with a name of similar
formation--Kudur-Mabuk. His inscriptions tell us that Kudur-Mabuk, lord
of the west-land (martu), had erected a shrine to the god "Sin, his
king, for prolonging his own life and that of his son, Zikar-Sin."[333]
On a statuette of bronze, now in the Louvre, we also read the name of
Kudur-Mabuk and his son. Babylonian inscriptions speak of battles of
Hammurabi king of Babylon against Kudur-Mabuk and against Elam.[334] The
tradition of the Hebrews tells us that the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah,
the kings of Adama, Zeboiim, and Zoar, _i.e._ the princes of the land
of Jordan, whose names are quoted, had served Kedor-Laomer, king of
Elam, for twelve years, and when they revolted, Kedor-Laomer and the
princes with him, Amraphel of Shinar, Arioch and Tidal, had come down
and conquered the Horites, the Amalekites, and the Amorites, _i.e._ the
tribes of the Syrian desert, the land of Aram between Sinai and Hermon;
and the kings of Jordan were defeated in the valley of Siddim. The first
part of the name Kedor-Laomer corresponds to Kudur in the name
Kudur-Nanchundi and Kudur-Mabuk. The second part recurs in the name
Lagamar, which is the name of a god worshipped by the Elamites.[335]
According to this, the Kudurids, or kings of Elam, of whom Sutruk and
Kudur-Nanchundi, Kudur-Mabuk, and Kudur-Lagamar are known by name, first
attacked Babylonia, then became rulers of Babylonia, and at one time
extended their dominion to the west as far as Syria. According to the
computations of the Hebrews, the campaign of Kedor-Laomer to Syria would
take place about the year 2100 B.C. The inscription would carry the
beginning of the rule of the Kudurids in Elam to the year 2500 B.C., and
consequently the beginning of a political constitution in Elam may be
assumed to be prior to the year 2300 B.C., and the sovereignty of the
Kudurids over Babylon and in the west may be placed about the year 2000
B.C.

If Elam was once more powerful than Babylon it may have been also
older--as among the Hebrews Elam is the eldest son of Shem--the
civilisation of the Elamites may have developed earlier than that of the
Babylonians. But although a number of names of kings have been handed
down to us on Assyrian tablets, which also tell us of ceaseless battles
with Elam, we are in almost total darkness about the nature and
direction of the civilisation of Elam. Our first notice is the Assyrian
account of the fall of the kingdom and the capture of the capital, and
from this we learn that the conditions and mode of life in the capital
of the Elamites were not very different from those of Babylon and
Nineveh. A picture of the city (found in the palace of Assurbanipal),
shows it to us between the two rivers (p. 249), oblong in shape, and
surrounded by high walls with numerous towers. Outside the city, between
the walls and the rivers are palms, and some dwelling-houses.[336]
Assurbanipal narrates: "Shushan, the great city, the abode of their
gods, the seat of their oracle, I took. I entered into their palaces and
opened their treasure-houses. Gold and silver, and furniture, and goods,
gathered together by the kings of Elam in times past and in the present,
the brass and precious stones with which the kings of Accad, Samuges,
and those before him had paid their mercenaries--the treasures on which
no enemy before me had laid a hand, I brought forth to Assyria. I
destroyed the tower of Shushan. The god of their oracles, who dwelt in
the groves, whose image no man had seen, and the images of the gods
Sumudu, Lagamar and the others (nineteen are mentioned), which the kings
of Elam worshipped, I conveyed with their priests to Assyria. Thirty-two
statues of the kings in silver, brass, and alabaster, I took from
Shushan. Madaktu and Huradi, and the statues of Ummanigas, of
Istar-Nanchundi, Halludus, and Tammaritu the younger, I carried to
Assyria. I broke the winged lions and bulls which guarded the temple,
and removed the winged bulls which stood at the gates of the temples of
Elam. Their gods and goddesses I sent into captivity."[337] More than a
hundred years after this time the Elamites had not forgotten their
independence, and they attempted to recover it by repeated rebellions
against the Persians.

The inscriptions in which the kings of Persia spoke to the nations of
their wide empire are of a triple character. Three different kinds of
cuneiform writing repeat the same matter in three different languages.
The first gives the inscription in the Persian language, the language of
the king and dominant people, the third repeats it in the
Babylonian-Assyrian language. The second, we may suppose, gives the
inscription in the language of Elam, for the Persian kings resided in
Susa, and in the enumeration of the subject territories, Susiana and
Babylonia as a rule come after Persia. The forms of the language in
cuneiform inscriptions on bricks and tiles discovered in the ruins of
Susa are closely related to the language of the cuneiform inscriptions
of the second kind in the inscriptions of the Achæmenids.[338] So far as
these have been deciphered the language contained in them seems for the
most part to be closely related to the Turkish-Tatar languages,[339]
while the names of the Elamite gods preserved in Assyrian inscriptions,
although different from those of Babylonia and Assyria, and also the
names of the kings of Elam, have more of a Semitic than a Turkish-Tatar
sound.

On Assyrian tablets, beside the Assyrian and Babylonian names of the
month, which are also the Hebrew names, we find names in another
language unknown to us;[340] and the symbols of the Assyrian cuneiform
writing are not only explained by the addition of the phonetic value and
actual meaning, but before the substantives, verb-forms, and declensions
of the Babylonian-Assyrian language are placed the corresponding words
and inflections of another language, which is decidedly of a non-Semitic
character, and also seems to belong to the Turkish-Tatar branch of
language.[341] If it was considered necessary in Babylonia and Assyria
to place another language before or beside their own, the relation of
this language to that spoken by the Babylonians and Assyrians must have
been very close. The most probable supposition is that it was the
language of the ancient population of the land about the lower course of
the two streams, which afterwards became subjected to Semitic
immigrants. Whatever be the value of this supposition, we may in any
case assume that the Semitic races found older inhabitants and an older
civilisation on the lower Euphrates and Tigris. This older population
was even then in possession of a system of writing, and this
civilisation and writing was adopted by the Semitic races, just as at a
later time the Armenians, Medes, and Persians borrowed their cuneiform
writing from the inhabitants of Babylonia, Assyria, and Susiana.

The precedence of Elam in Hebrew tradition, the statement of Berosus
that civilisation came from the Persian Gulf, the ancient supremacy of
Elam over Babylonia, which we can discover from the Hebrew tradition,
and more plainly from the inscriptions, are so many proofs that the
oldest seats of culture in the lower lands of the Euphrates and Tigris
lay at the mouths of the two rivers. And this conclusion receives
further support from the fact that the oldest centres of the Babylonian
state were nearer the mouth of the Euphrates. Perhaps we may even go a
step further. The Hebrews ascribe the foundation of the Babylonian
kingdom to a son of the south. The language and religious conceptions of
the Babylonians and Assyrians show a close relationship with the
language and religion of the tribes of South Arabia; some of these
tribes are in Genesis variously enrolled among the descendants of Shem
and of Cush. Hence we may perhaps assume that Arabian tribes on the
sea-shore forced their way eastward, to the land at the mouth of the
Euphrates and Tigris, and then, passing up the stream, settled in the
valley of the two rivers, as far as the southern offshoots of the
Armenian mountains.[342] Of these Semitic tribes those which remained on
the lower Tigris and subjected the old population of Susiana, could not
absorb the conquered Kissians (p. 249). The old language retained the
upper hand, and developed; and the ruling tribe, the Semitic Elamites,
were amalgamated with the ancient population. It was otherwise on the
lower Euphrates, where the Semitic immigrants succeeded--probably in a
long process of time, since it was late and by slow degrees that they
gained the upper hand--in absorbing the old Turanian population, and
formed a separate Semitic community, when they had borrowed from their
predecessors the basis of civilisation and the system of cuneiform
writing which was invented for another language.

In the fragments of Berosus the inhabitants of Babylonia are called
Chaldees, a name which Western writers give especially to the priests of
Babylon, though even to them a district on the lower Euphrates is known
as Chaldæa.[343] The inscriptions of the Assyrian kings name the whole
land Kaldi, and the inhabitants Kaldiai.[344] To the Hebrews, as has
been observed (p. 248), Erech, Accad, and Calneh were the beginning of
the kingdom of Nimrod. In the fragments of Berosus, Babylon, the Bab-Ilu
of the inscriptions, _i.e._ "Gate of Il (El)," Sippara and Larancha are
supposed to be in existence before the flood. Erech, the Orchoe of the
Greeks, and Arku of the inscriptions, is the modern Warka, to the south
of Babylon on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, where vast heaps of
ruins remain to testify to the former importance of the city. The site
of Calneh and of the Larancha mentioned in the fragments cannot be
ascertained, unless the latter city is the same as the Larsam mentioned
in the inscriptions. In these the name Accad occurs very frequently. The
kings of Babylon, and after them the kings of Assyria, who ruled over
Babylon, called themselves kings of Babel, of Sumir, and Accad, names
which are used to denote the districts (perhaps Upper and Lower
Babylonia) and their inhabitants. Sippara, the city of the sacred books
and mystic lore of the Chaldæans (p. 246), is called by the Hebrews,
Sepharvaim, _i.e._ "the two Sepher." Sepher means "writing." It was
therefore the Babylonian City of Scriptures. The Hebrews were aware
that this city worshipped the gods Adar and Anu, Adrammelech and
Anammelech. The inscriptions also mention two cities of the name of
Sippara, or as they give the word, Shipar; they distinguish the Shipar
of the god Anu from the Shipar of Samas, the sun-god. The cuneiform
symbol for Sippara means "City of the sun of the four quarters of the
earth," and the Euphrates is denoted by a symbol which means "River of
Sippara."[345] From this it is clear what position this city once took
in Babylonia. The Ur Kasdim, _i.e._ "Ur of the Chaldæans" in the Hebrew
Scriptures, is the modern Mugheir, south-east of Babylon; on
clay-tablets discovered in the ruins of this place we find cuneiform
symbols, which are to be read as "Uru."[346] The Kutha and Telassar of
the Hebrews also recur in the Kuthi and Tel Assur of the inscriptions.
In his inscriptions Sennacherib boasts that in the year 704 B.C. he took
eighty-nine fortified cities and 820 places in Babylonia, beside Babylon
itself.[347]

The tumuli covering the ruins of these cities and the Assyrian
inscriptions have preserved for us the names of more than fifty of the
kings who once ruled over Babylon. The fragments of Berosus limit the
period of the independence of Babylon to the 458 years from 1976 B.C.,
to 1518 B.C. (p. 248), and after the Chaldæan kings of this period they
place Arabian kings down to 1273 B.C., who in turn are followed by the
Assyrian kings. These statements are flatly contradicted by the
inscriptions of Babylonia and Assyria. We have already seen that in the
period from about the year 2300 B.C. to 2000 B.C., Elam had the
preponderance, and in part the sovereignty, over Babylonia. Afterwards
Babylon became independent, and maintained her position even against
Assyria, until, after the ninth century before Christ, the latter gained
the upper hand; and then, from the beginning of the seventh century, for
a period of seventy or eighty years, the independence of Babylon was
entirely destroyed.

As yet it is not possible to arrange the names preserved in the
inscriptions in a definite order. We can only perceive that in the
oldest period Babylon was not yet the capital of the kingdom. Erech, Ur,
and Nipur, _i.e._ cities lying to the south, were the seat of
government. We find also that the power of the ancient princes must have
extended to the mouth of the Euphrates, and afterwards over a part of
Mesopotamia, and over the Assyrian district on the upper Tigris, till
Assyria, about the year 1500 B.C., became an independent kingdom. That
the region of the upper Euphrates did not belong to Babylonia, but was
the seat of independent princes, more especially at Karchemish, is shown
by the campaigns of the Pharaohs against Naharina, _i.e._ Mesopotamia,
which fall in the period between 1650 B.C. and 1350 B.C., and the
assistance which was rendered at this time by the princes of the upper
Euphrates to the Syrians against the Egyptians.[348] Afterwards the
Assyrians forced their way over the upper Euphrates towards Syria,
without coming in conflict with the Babylonians. At a later period the
lower part of Chaldæa separated from Babylon, and independent princes
established themselves on the lower Euphrates--a fact which obviously
was of great assistance to the Assyrians in gaining the upper hand over
Babylon.

Among the ancient princes of Babylon one of the first places must be
allotted to a king whose name is read as Urukh. On tiles discovered at
Warka (Erech) we find that the "king of Ur, king of Sumir and Accad, has
built a temple to his Lady, the goddess Nana;" on tiles discovered at
Mugheir (Ur), it is said that "Urukh has built the temple and fortress
of Ur in honour of his Lord, the god Sin;" and finally on an inscription
of Nabonetus, the last king of Babylon, which he had surrendered as far
as Ur, we are told that Urukh began to build a temple here to the great
goddess, and that his son Ilgi completed it. At Nipur (Niffer), Urukh
built temples to Bel and Bilit, and a temple to the god Samas at the
modern Senkereh.[349] On a cylinder of Urukh we find three beardless
forms, apparently the king, his son, and the queen, holding up their
hands to an aged long-bearded and seated figure, which the new moon
visible above him denotes as the moon-god Sin; the inscription, written
in the older form of cuneiform writing (see below), runs thus: "Of
Urukh, the mighty Lord, the King of Ur,..." Another cylinder belongs to
the time of his son Ilgi. It bears the inscription: "For saving the life
of Ilgi, from the mighty Lord, the king of Ur, son of Urukh. May his
name continue!" Inscriptions on tiles inform us that he built a temple
at Mugheir.[350] King Ismidagon (_i.e._ "Dagon hears"), whose name is
also found on tiles of Mugheir, is entitled on them, "Lord of
Nipur,[351] king of Sumir, and Accad." Of king Sarruk (_i.e._ "strong
is the king") an inscription tells us that he built the city of Agane,
and the tablets of prognostication announce to him, that he will conquer
Elam, and subjugate the whole of Babylonia and Syria.[352] The
inscriptions of king Hammurabi (_i.e._ "the sun-god is great")
discovered at Babylon, Zerghul, and Tell Sifr, tell us that the gods El
and Bel had delivered the inhabitants of Sumir and Accad to his
dominion, that he had overthrown Elam, and conquered Mabuk (p. 251), and
that he had caused the river Hammurabi (_i.e._ the canal of that name)
to be dug for the benefit of the Babylonians, and had provided a
constant supply of water for Sumir and Accad. At the command of Merodach
he had erected a fortress on this canal, of which the towers were as
high as mountains, and had named it after the name of his father
Dur-Ummubanit.[353]

Hammurabi is the first who, according to his inscriptions, resided at
Babylon. If Sarrukin and he succeeded in breaking down the supremacy of
Elam, we must put Hammurabi at the head of the dynasty which reigned
over Babylon, according to Berosus, from 1976-1518 B.C. (p. 248). In an
Assyrian list of the kings of Babylon, belonging to the times of
Assurbanipal, we find, after Hammurabi, the names of more than fifteen
kings, and opposite the last of these, king Binsumnasir of Babylon, two
kings of Assyria, Assurnirar and Nabudan, are placed as contemporaries
(between 1500 and 1450 B.C.; see below).[354] Then Karatadas, of
Babylon, makes an alliance with Assurbel-nisi, king of Assyria, and the
friendship was continued under their successors, Purnapuryas of Babylon,
and Busurassur of Assyria (about 1450 to 1400 B.C.) Assuruballit, the
successor of Busurassur, made war upon Nazibugas, the usurper who
succeeded Purnapuryas, and raised to the throne in his place Kurigalzu,
a son of Purnapuryas (about 1400 B.C.) Tiles at Senkereh inform us that
Purnapuryas, "king of Babylon, of Sumir and Accad," restored the great
temple which Urukh had built for the sun-god Samas. Tiles are found at
Ur (Mugheir) with the name Kurigalzu; and the fortress Dur-Kurigalzu
(Akerkuf), which is often mentioned in later Assyrian inscriptions, and
spoken of as "the key of Babylonia," was built, as is proved by the
stamp on the tiles, in the reign of this king.[355] An ornament, now in
the British Museum, has the inscription: "Kurigalzu, son of Purnapuryas,
king of Babel."[356] The grandson of Kurigalzu was Merodach-Baladan
(Marduk-habaliddina, _i.e._ "Merodach presented the son").[357] Then
about the year 1300 B.C., Tiglath Adar (Tuklat Adar), of Assyria,
attacked the Babylonians, at first, as it seems, with success, but at
last he lost his seal in this war, and for 600 years it was preserved in
the treasury at Babylon. Still more unfortunate was Belkudurussur of
Assyria in his attempt on Babylon. He was defeated, and fell himself in
the battle (about 1200 B.C.); his successor also, Adarpalbitkur, barely
succeeded in defending himself from the attacks of the Babylonians. When
afterwards the first Nebuchadnezzar (Nabukudurussur) of Babylon twice
invaded Assyria, Assur-ris-ilim, king of Assyria (between 1150-1130
B.C.), succeeded in repulsing him, and Nebuchadnezzar lost forty
war-chariots and a standard. Tiglath Pilesar I. (Tuklat-habal-assar,
about 1120 B.C.), the successor of Assur-ris-ilim, fought against the
Babylonians, and, like Tiglath Adar, he was at first successful.
Assyrian tablets boast that in two successive years he had taken
Dur-Kurigalzu, both Sipparas (p. 257), and even Babylon. But the result
of the war was that Marduknadinakh, king of Babylon, about the year 1110
B.C., carried off images of gods from Assyria to Babylon.[358]
Assur-bel-kala of Assyria (1110-1090 B.C.) had to fight against another
Marduk of Babylon. Two hundred years later Nebubaladan of Babylon
repulsed the attacks of Assurnasirpal of Assyria (883-859 B.C.) Then
Shalmaneser II. of Assyria made such excellent use of a contention for
the throne of Babylonia, that in the year 850 B.C. he offered sacrifice
at Babylon, Borsippa, and Kutha. But it was not till the year 703 or 689
B.C. that the seal of Tiglath Adar and the images lost by Tiglath
Pilesar I. were carried back to Assyria.

FOOTNOTES:

[306] Xenoph. "Cyrop." 7, 5; Strabo, pp. 41, 84, 544, 736, 737.

[307] Strabo, p. 748; Xenoph. "Anab." 1, 5, 1 ff.; G. Hertzberg,
"Feldzug der Zehntausend," s. 139 ff.

[308] Beros. ap. Sync. p. 28; Herod. 1, 193; "Anab." 2, 3.

[309] Herod. 1, 178-200.

[310] "De Coelo," p. 503.

[311] Diod. 3, 31; Cic. "De Divin." 1, 19; Jul. Afric. ap. Syncell. p.
17; Plin. "Hist. Nat." 7, 57; cf. H. Martin, "Revue Archéol." 1862, 5,
243.

[312] Between 280-270 B.C. Clinton, "Fasti Hell." ad ann. 279.

[313] Abydeni Fragm. 9, ed. Müller.

[314] Berosi Fragm. 1, ed. Müller.

[315] Abyd. Fragm. 1, 2, ed. Müller; Berosi Fragm. 5.

[316] In the Armenian Eusebius, p. 10, ed. Schoene, the name is
Lancharis.

[317] G. Smith, "Bibl. Arch." 3, 531.

[318] So in the Armenian Eusebius; in Syncellus it is five stadia,
_i.e._ 3,000 feet long.

[319] Eusebius, p. 14, ed. Mai; Syncell. p. 30; Abydeni Fragm. 3 ed.
Müller; Lucian, "De Dea Syria," 12.

[320] Eusebius gives 33,091. As Syncellus enumerates the sares, neres,
and sosses, the number given in the text is the correct one, or must be
replaced by 34,091. The basis of the calculation which Syncellus has
adopted in the four first dynasties of Berosus has been thoroughly
established by Lepsius ("Chronol. der Ægypter," s. 78).

[321] The period of the fourth dynasty, the eleven kings, is filled up
to 248 years from the marginal note on the Armenian manuscripts of
Eusebius.

[322] G. Smith, "Assyrian Discoveries," p. 185-195. I retain the reading
"Sisit" as against Hasisadra because of the "Sisythes" of Lucian.

[323] According to Bunsen, "Ægypt." 5, 2, 61 ff., the Hebrews originally
were acquainted with only seven patriarchs before the flood; see below.

[324] Gen. ix. 20, 28; xi. 2-9.

[325] Plin. "Hist. Nat." 6, 30. Hipparenum can be nothing but
Sipparenum, or Sipparenorum.

[326] If the number 34,091 be correct (p. 241, note 2), the year 2447
B.C. would be the first year of the historical era.

[327] It is pointed out by Von Gutschmid in the Rhein. Mus. 8, 252.

[328] Gen. x. 22; x. 8, 10.

[329] Menke, "Jahrb. für classiche Philologie," 1862, s. 545.

[330] Aesch. "Pers." 16.

[331] The name Nanchundi occurs also in the compounds Istar-Nanchundi,
p. 253.

[332] G. Smith, "Assurbanipal," p. 200, 234-236, 249-251. As in two
passages 1,635 years are given with quotation of the Neres and Sosses,
this number must be kept in the third passage instead of 1,535 years.
The conquest of Susa did not follow immediately on the conquest of
Babylon, in the year 647; see below.

[333] Sayce, "Bibl. Arch." 3, 479; Oppert, "Empires de Chaldée et
d'Assyrie," p. 27.

[334] G. Smith, "Discov." p. 234; "Early Hist." p. 58.

[335] Genesis, xiv. 1-12; G. Smith, "Assurb." p. 228.

[336] Also in Ménant, "Les Achémenides," p. 136.

[337] G. Smith, "Assurbanipal," p. 224, ff.

[338] Sayce, "Transact. Bibl. Arch." 3, 465, 485.

[339] So Rawlinson, Norris, Mordtmann, "Zeitschrift d. d. M. G." 1870,
s. 7, 76, and Sayce, _loc. cit._

[340] Norris, "Dict." I. 50.

[341] Such is also the opinion of Eberhard Schrader.

[342] Schrader, "Abstammung und Ursitze der Chaldæer," s. 405 ff., 416
ff.

[343] Strabo, p. 735, 765, 767; Pliny, "Hist. Nat." 6, 23, 27. 5, 20.

[344] On the correct interpretation of the passage, Isaiah xxiii. 13,
see Schrader, "Keilschriften und Alt. Test." s. 269; on the Armenian
Chaldæans, the Chalybian Chaldæans, Schrader, "Abstammung der Chaldæer,"
s. 399, 400. The former are to be sought for in the valley of the Lycus,
and are known to the Armenians as Chalti: Kiepert, "Monats-Berichte der
B. Akad. d. W." 1869. Arphaxad, _i.e._ the high mountain district Albak
(Kiepert, _loc. cit_. s. 200), on the Upper Zab, was on the other hand
undoubtedly colonised by Semitic tribes; but these probably came from
Mesopotamia and Assyria. Arphaxad is the younger brother of Elam and
Asshur. Where to look for Kir, whence, according to Amos ix. 7; i. 5,
the Syrians came, we do not know.

[345] Schrader, "Assyrisch-babyl. Keilschriften," s. 382, 18, 42, 165,
225.

[346] Schrader, "Keilschriften und Alt. Test." s. 383.

[347] Oppert, "Inscript. des Sargonides," p. 55 ff.

[348] Above, pp. 132, 151, 152. From Naharina Tuthmosis III. received,
among other things, forty-seven tiles of lead, forty-five pounds of
gold, eighty-one mana (minæ) of spice.--De Rougé, "Notice," pp. 16, 18.

[349] Oppert, "Empires," pp. 16, 17; G. Rawlinson, "Five Monarchies," 1,
63, 64, 137; Ménant, "Babylone," pp. 74, 75, 254.

[350] G. Smith, "Early History," p. 36; G. Rawlinson, "Five Monarchies,"
pp. 69, 94, 157 ff.

[351] Oppert, "Empires," p. 21.

[352] Schrader, "Keilsch. und Alt. Test." s. 47; "Assyrisch-babylonische
Keilschriften," s. 162; Sayce, "Zeitschrift für ægypt. Sprache," 1870,
s. 151; Ménant, "Babylone," p. 98.

[353] Oppert, "Empires," p. 36.

[354] Lenormant, "Lettres Assyr." 1, 249.

[355] Oppert, "Empires," p. 28; Ménant, "Babylone," pp. 118, 121.

[356] G. Rawlinson, "Five Monarchies," pp. 169, 170.

[357] G. Smith, "Discov." p. 236 ff., gives a deed of gift of
Merodach-Baladan, the son of Milihiru, the grandson of Kurigalzu.

[358] Ménant, "Babylone," pp. 127, 128.




CHAPTER II.

THE RELIGION AND SCIENCE OF THE CHALDÆANS.


In the period from 2000 to 1000 B.C., Babylonia under Hammurabi,
Nebuchadnezzar, and Marduknadinakh, was already the foremost state of
Hither Asia in power, science, and skill in art. Her civilisation had
developed without external assistance. If the first foundations were
borrowed, and not laid by the Babylonians, they certainly were not due
to the Egyptians. The religious views of the Babylonians and the
Egyptians rest on an entirely different basis. In Egypt the heavens were
carefully observed; but the Chaldæans arrived at a different division of
the heavens, of the year, and month, and day, and the results of their
astronomy were far clearer and more exact. In Egypt, weights and
measures were regulated by the priests; the Chaldæans established a much
more accurate and consistent system, which prevailed far beyond the
borders of Babylonia. The Egyptians reached the highest point that could
be reached by the art of building in stone; but the buildings of the
Chaldæans in brick are unsurpassed in size, strength, and height by any
nation or period. To what antiquity the hydraulic works of the Chaldæans
reached we do not know (the canal of Hammurabi has been mentioned
above); but we find that in size and variety they were not behind those
of Egypt. Their sculpture cannot be compared with the Egyptian in
artistic finish; but the few fragments which remain exhibit a style
which, while thoroughly independent, is more vigorous and complete, and
shows a greater freedom of conception than the Egyptian.

The Babylonians, as we learn from Diodorus, worshipped twelve gods as
lords of the sky. To each of these a sign in the zodiac and a month in
the year were dedicated.[359] These statements are supported by the
inscriptions. The supreme god of the Babylonians was El (Il), after whom
they named their capital, Babel, "Gate of El." After El came the gods
Anu, Bel (Bil), Hea, Sin, Samas, and Bin; and after these the gods of
the planets; Adar, Merodach, Nergal, Istar, and Nebo. Of El we only know
that he was the supreme god, who sat enthroned above the other gods.
What peculiar importance and power is ascribed to him is the more
difficult to ascertain, as the name of the third deity, Bel, simply
means "lord," and by this title not only Bel himself, but El and other
gods also are invoked. In his inscription, king Hammurabi says "that El
and Bel have given over to his rule the inhabitants of Sumir and Accad."
In the story of the flood, quoted above, El is called "the prince of the
gods," "the warrior." In Assyrian inscriptions he is the "lamp of the
gods," "the lord of the universe." The Greeks give us accounts of the
great temple of Belus at Babylon, and represent the Babylonians as
swearing "by the great Belus."[360] In the fragments of Berosus it was
Belus who smote asunder the primæval darkness, and divided Omorka, and
caused the creation of men and beasts; while according to the clay
tablets of the flood, El was unwilling to save even Sisit. Of the god
Hea we can at present ascertain no more from the inscriptions than that
he is the "lord of the earth," "the king of rivers;" and that it is he
who announced the coming flood to Sisit, and pointed out the means of
safety. Anu, the god who follows next after El, was sovereign of the
upper realms of the sky. In the narrative of the flood given on the clay
tablets the gods fled horror-stricken before the storm into the heaven
of Anu. In Assyrian inscriptions the god has frequently the epithet
Malik (_i.e._ "king"). As the Hebrews inform us that the men of
Sepharvaim worshipped Anammelech, it is obvious that Anumalik and
Anammelech are one and the same deity. The creature, who brought the
first revelations of language and writing, is called in Berosus Oan, by
others, Yan.[361] As these revelations reached Sepharvaim, and the
sacred books were preserved there (p. 245), we may venture to assume
that the Oan of Berosus and the Anu of the inscriptions are the same
god. The nature of the next deities, Sin, Samas, and Bin, is more
intelligible. Sin is the god of the moon. On monuments the new moon is
often found beside his bearded image. The inscriptions provide him with
"white-beaming horns." The main seat of his worship is Ur (Mugheir),
where, as we have seen, Urukh built him a temple, and Nabonetus, the
last king of Babylon, prays this god "to plant in the heart of his
first-born a reverence for his great divinity, that he might not yield
to sin, or favour the unfaithful."[362] The sun-god Samas is
distinguished by sign of the circle; according to the inscription he
illuminates "heaven and earth," and is the "lord of the day." Beside
Sin and Samas the Babylonians worshipped a deity of the heaven, Bin, the
god who "thunders in the midst of the sky," who holds "a flaming sword
in his hand," "who holds the lightning," "who is the giver of abundance,
the lord of fertility."[363]

At the head of the five spirits of the planets stands the lord of Saturn
(the Kaivanu of the Babylonians), the most distant and highest of all.
This is the god Adar, _i.e._ "the sublime." His name was given to the
last month in the Babylonian year. In the inscriptions the epithet Malik
is often joined to Adar; Sakkut Adar also is a name given in the
inscriptions to this god. The Hebrews tell us that the men of Sepharvaim
worshipped Adrammelech; and this can hardly be any other deity than the
Adar-Malik of the inscriptions. They also add that children were burned
to Adrammelech,[364] and hence we may conclude that the Adar of the
Babylonians was a harsh and cruel deity, averse to generation, whose
wrath had to be appeased by human sacrifice. When the prophet Amos
announces to the Israelites that they would "carry Siccuth their king,
and Kewan (Chiun) their star-god, their images which they had
made,"[365] Sichuth-Melech can be no other god than Sakkut-Malik, _i.e._
Adar, and by Kewan is meant the Kaivanu (Saturn) of the
inscriptions.[366] Nebo (Nabu), the god of Borsippa, was the lord of the
planet Mercury. According to the inscriptions of Babylonia, he ruled
over the hosts of heaven and earth. His image on the cylinder of Urukh
has been mentioned above (p. 259). Statues of Nebo with long beard and
hair, and a robe from the breast downwards, have been found in the
ruins of Nineveh. Assyrian inscriptions entitle him the "prince of the
gods." His name means the "revealer," and what we learn from western
writers about a special school of Chaldaic priests at Borsippa agrees
very well with this. The lord of Mars, Nergal, was worshipped at the
city of Kutha. The inscriptions name him the "king of the battle," the
"ruler of the storm," or simply the "lion-god."[367] Hence the winged
lions with a human head at the temples and palace gates of Susa and
Nineveh (p. 253) were his images, and stood no doubt at Babylon and
Kutha also, while the winged bulls must have been the images of Adar. In
the narrative of the flood on Assyrian tablets, it is Adar who
overthrows and Nergal who destroys (p. 243). After the restoration of
the Babylonian kingdom, the kings are named after Nebo and Nergal. Yet
the inscriptions of Nebuchadnezzar II. celebrate above all other deities
the lord of Jupiter, Merodach, as Belrabu, i.e. the "great lord," the
"highest god," the "lord of heaven and earth."[368]

To this circle of planet-gods belongs also the female deity, whom the
Babylonians worshipped with much zeal--the goddess Bilit, _i.e._ "Lady,"
the Mylitta of Herodotus. Her star is Venus. The inscriptions name her
"Queen of the Gods," "Mother of the Gods." As she is also called the
"Lady of Offspring," it is clear that she was regarded by the
Babylonians as the goddess of fertility and birth. They recognised the
power of the goddess in the charm and beauty of vegetative nature.
Within the wall of her temple at Babylon a grove afforded a cool shade,
and a cistern reminded the worshippers of the mistress of the
fertilizing water. The creatures sacred to her were fish, as the
inhabitants of water, and remarkable for vigorous propagation, and the
dove.[369] According to the account of Herodotus the maidens of
Babylonia had to worship the goddess by the sacrifice of their
virginity; once in her life each was expected to sell her body in honour
of the goddess, and thus to redeem herself. Hence on the festivals of
Mylitta the maidens of Babylon sat in long rows in the grove of the
goddess, with chaplets of cord upon their heads. Even the daughters of
the wealthy came in covered cars with a numerous body of attendants.
Here they had to remain till one of the pilgrims, who came to worship
the goddess, cast a piece of gold into their laps, with the words, "In
the name of Mylitta." Then the maiden was compelled to follow him, and
comply with his wishes. The money thus earned she gave to the
temple-treasury, and was henceforth freed from her obligation to the
goddess. "The good-looking and graceful maidens," adds Herodotus,
"quickly found a pilgrim, but the ugly ones could not satisfy the law,
and often remained in the temple three or four years."[370] The Hebrew
scriptures confirm the statements of Herodotus. They tell us of the
Babylonians, "that their women, with cords about them (they were bound
to the goddess), sat by the wayside, and burnt bran for perfume, and she
who was drawn away by the passer-by reproached her fellow that she had
not been thought worthy of the honour, and that her cord was not
broken."[371] The goddess Nana, whose image, as we have seen, was
carried away at an ancient period from Erech to Susa, and to whom it is
Nebuchadnezzar's boast that he built temples at Babylon and
Borsippa,[372] was hardly distinguished from Bilit or Mylitta.

Opposed to the goddess of fertility, procreation, and birth, stood
Istar, the goddess of war, of ruin, and destruction. She is often
mentioned in inscriptions as "the Queen of Babylon;" according to
Assyrian inscriptions she carries a bow, and western writers tell us of
the worship of Artemis by the Babylonians. That this goddess united with
Bilit, and sent alternately blessing and fruit, death and ruin, is
placed beyond doubt, by the analogous worship of Baltis, Ashera, and
Astarte by the Syrians, and more especially by the Phoenicians and
Carthaginians. Moreover the planet Venus belonged to this goddess in
both her forms. In the tablets of the flood, Istar boasts that men owed
their existence to her (p. 243), and an Assyrian syllabarium tells us
that "the star of Venus (Dilbat, the Delephat of the Greeks), at
sunrise, is Istar among the gods; the same star at sunset is Bilit among
the gods."[373] On Assyrian tablets is found a narrative of the journey
of Istar to the under-world. She determines to go down to the house of
the departed, to the abode of the god Irkalla, to the house which has no
exit, to the road which leads not back, to the place where the entrance
is without light, where dust is their nourishment and mould their food,
where light is not seen, where they dwell in darkness, where the arches
are filled with spirits like birds; over the gate and the panels dust is
strewed. "Watchman of the waters," said Istar, "open thy gate, that I
may enter. If thou openest not, I will break thy gate, and burst asunder
the bars; I will shatter the threshold and destroy the doors." The
watchman opened the gate, and as she passed through he took the great
crown from her head; and when she passed through the second gate he took
the rings from her ears; and when she passed through the third gate he
took the necklace from her neck; and when she passed through the fourth
gate he took the ornaments from her breast; and when she passed through
the fifth gate he took the girdle of her robe; and when she passed
through the sixth gate he took the rings from her arms and legs; and
when she passed through the seventh gate he took the mantle from her
neck and said, "Thus does Ninkigal to those who come to her." Arrived in
the under-world, Istar was grievously afflicted in the eyes, on the
hips, feet, heart, head, and whole body. But the world above could not
bear the loss of Istar, "the bull sought not the cow, nor the male ass
the female," and the god Hea sent a message to Ninkigal, the Lady of the
under-world, to set her free. Ninkigal caused the water of life to pour
out over Istar. Then the seven doors of the under-world were again
opened for her, and before each she received back what had been taken
from her at her entrance.[374]

In the fragments of Berosus the last of the fish-men is called Odakon
(p. 239). Inscriptions of Hammurabi and Nebuchadnezzar II. of Babylon
mention a god Dakan, or Dagani; and we also meet the name of this god in
the name of the king Ismidagon, whom we found it necessary to place
before the year 2000 B.C. Assurbanipal of Assyria boasts of the favour
of Anu and Dagon. These two gods appear in the same connection in other
inscriptions. Sargon, king of Assyria, calls himself "the apple of the
eye of Anu and Dagon."[375] Male figures, with a horned cap on the head,
and ending in a fish, and priests with fishskins hung above them, are
often found on the monuments of Nineveh. As the word Dag means "fish,"
we may with confidence find in the god Dakan the fish-god of the
Babylonians; the god who out of moisture gives plenty, fertility, and
increase. That the Canaanites also worshipped Dagon is proved by the
names Beth-Dagon and Kaphar-Dagon, which occur near Joppa and Sichem.
The Philistines also on the coast of the Mediterranean invoked the same
god. His image in the temple at Ashdod had the face and hands of a man,
the body of a fish, and the feet of a man (see below). The seven
fish-men who rose out of the Persian Gulf were therefore seven
manifestations, or revelations, of the gods Oan and Dagon, Anu and
Dakan.

The chief seats of the religious worship of the Babylonians were Babylon
itself, when it had become the metropolis of the land, Borsippa and
Kutha. The kings of Assyria, who succeeded in entering Babylonia, or in
subjugating it, remark more than once that they have sacrificed at
Babylon, Borsippa, and Kutha, to Bel, Nebo, and Nergal, and Assurbanipal
tells us that his rebellious brother, the viceroy of Babylon, had
purchased the help of the Elamites with the treasures of the temple of
Bel at Babylon, of Nebo at Borsippa, and Nergal at Kutha.[376] Hence
these temples must have been the most considerable, and the treasures in
them the largest. Beside these temples, as has been remarked, Erech was
of importance, as the seat of the worship of Nana, Ur contained the
temple of the moon-god, and Sepharvaim was the abode of Anu and Samas,
and the city of the sacred scriptures.

The relation of the deities to the luminaries of the sky occupied a very
prominent place in the minds of the Babylonians. The powerful operation
of the sun was due to the god Samas; the moon, as we have seen, belonged
to Sin, Saturn to Adar, Jupiter to Merodach, Mercury to Nebo, Mars to
the war-god Nergal, Venus to Istar-Bilit. From the inscriptions of
Nebuchadnezzar II. we learn that there existed at Borsippa, the seat of
the worship of Nebo, an ancient temple to "the seven lamps of the
earth." The horizon of the Babylonian plain was very extensive; the more
uniform and boundless the expanse of earth, the more did the eye turn
upwards towards the changes, movements, and life of the sky. In the
clear atmosphere the eye followed the regular paths of the planets, and
discovered each morning new stars, while others disappeared every
evening. With the higher or lower position of the sun, or of this or
that star, a new season commenced, or changes took place in the natural
world; the inundation rose, and vegetation began to awaken or decay. On
the rising and setting of the sun, the moon, and the stars, the life of
mankind, their waking and sleeping, their vigour and weariness,
depended; the seasons of budding and ripening fruit, of favourable or
unfavourable navigation, commenced with the appearance of certain stars
and ended with their disappearance. It was natural, amid such
conceptions, to believe that the whole life of nature and man depended
on the luminaries of the sky, and that the earth and mankind received
their laws from above, from the gleaming paths of the constellations.
The good or evil effect which these stars were thought to exercise upon
the life of nature, applied also to their influence on the life of man.

Within the circle of such conceptions the planets naturally occupied a
prominent place. The Greeks inform us that the Chaldæans called these
stars "interpreters," as proclaiming the will of the gods.[377] Among
them Jupiter and Venus (Merodach and Istar-Bilit) passed with the later
astrologers as luck-bringing powers. Jupiter was supposed to bring the
beneficent and genial warmth of the atmosphere, while Venus, the star of
evening (Bilit), poured forth the cool fructifying dew. Saturn (Adar)
was an unlucky star, the Great Evil; and this confirms the conclusion
already drawn that Adar was thought to be a god averse to generation,
and hostile. Mars (Nergal) was also a pernicious planet: his fiery glow
brought scorching heat, and he is the Lesser Evil of astrologers.
Mercury, the moon, and the sun, _i.e._ Nebo, Sin, and Samas, stood
midway between the good and evil stars; they were of an intermediate
undefined character.[378]

But according to the Chaldæans the planets also assumed the influence
and character of the constellations in which they passed over the earth.
They divided the path of the sun into twelve stations or houses,
according to the constellations which it passes through in its course.
The sun's proper house was its highest position in the sign of Leo. The
paths of the planets were divided in a similar way; and to the Chaldæan
these "houses of the planets" became divine powers, because they altered
and defined the character and operation of the planets. Hence they even
call them "lords of the gods."[379] On the other hand thirty other fixed
stars are "counselling gods," because they were thought to exercise
only a secondary influence on the planets; and lastly, twelve fixed
stars in the northern sky, and twelve in the southern were called the
"judges." Of these twenty-four stars, those which were visible decided
on the fortunes of the living, and those which were invisible on the
fortunes of the dead.[380] The inscriptions also distinguish two classes
of twelve stars each; of which one is named "the stars of Accad," the
other "the stars of the West."[381] Each month of the year belonged to a
god; the first to the god Anu: the seven days of the week belonged to
the sun, moon, and five planets; after the moon came Mars, then Mercury,
then Jupiter, then Venus, and last of all Saturn. The day belonged to
the planet to which the first hour after midnight was allotted; in the
next hour the planet ruled which came next in proximity to the sun; and
in the same way followed the remaining planets, first in a solar, then
in a lunar series.

Thus the Chaldæans worshipped "the sun, and the moon, and the zodiac;"
thus they offered incense, as the Hebrews say, to the "houses of the
planets, and the whole host of heaven."[382] This lore was the work of
the priests, who accordingly understood how to read the will of the gods
in the constellations of the sky, and to foretell the fate of life from
the hour of birth, and from the ever-changing position of the stars to
fix the suitable moment for commencing any task or undertaking. How the
stars passed through the sky, how they approached each other, or
diverged, imparted or withdrew their operation, were found in equipoise
or opposition--on this depended the prosperity or misfortune of the
kingdom, the king, the year, the day, the hour. Moreover it was of
importance at what season of the year, and in what quarter of the sky
the stars rose, or disappeared, and what colours they displayed.[383] To
the east belonged withering heat, to the south warmth, to the west
fertilising moisture, and to the north cold; and the planets exercised
greater or less power as they stood higher or lower.[384] Tablets
discovered at Nineveh allow us a closer insight into the system of these
constellations. On some of these we find written as follows:--"If
Jupiter is seen in the month of Tammuz, there will be corpses." "If
Venus comes opposite the star of the fish, there will be devastation."
"If the star of the great lion is gloomy, the heart of the people will
not rejoice." "If the moon is seen on the first day of the month, Accad
will prosper." One tablet supplies information for all the periods of
the day and night in the 360 days of the year, telling us what day and
what period is favourable or unfavourable for commencing a campaign, or
a siege, for storming the enemy's walls, or for defence.[385]

Such was the faith and doctrine of the Babylonians. In the original
conception of El as lord of the sky, and Adar as the highest of the star
gods, there may have been nobler and simpler traits, yet even these
early views were not without their harshness and cruelty, as we are
forced to conclude from the Hebrew accounts of the sacrifices offered to
Adar. Such traits are also more than outweighed by the licentious
worship of Mylitta, in which the sensual elements of the Semitic
character are seen in all their coarseness. With the growth of the
kingdom, and the consequent effeminacy and luxury of life in Babylonia,
this side of their religion must have become predominant, while, on the
other hand, the great conception of a world ruled and governed by the
movements of the stars tended in time to degenerate into mere
astrological computations and fortune-telling.

Our knowledge of the life and position of the priests of Babylon is
scanty. The Greeks tell us that they took the same place as in Egypt.
Their rank was hereditary; the son was instructed by the father from an
early age. Some occupied themselves with the offerings and
purifications; others strove to avert existing or threatening evils by
expiations and charms; others explained any miraculous phenomena of
nature, interpreted dreams, and prophesied from the flight of birds. The
Hebrew scriptures speak of interpreters of stars and signs, magicians
and prophets.[386] According to the accounts of Western writers, the
priests at Babylon inhabited a special quarter of the city, and there
were schools of priests at Sippara.[387] The fragments of Berosus
pointed out Babylon, Sippara, and Larancha (p. 239) as centres of
priestly wisdom even before the flood, inasmuch as they attribute to
these places special revelations of the gods Anu and Dakan. They speak
of the sacred books saved in Sippara from the flood. These books they
divide into ancient, mediæval, and modern. By the "ancient" books we
must understand the announcements which the god Anu caused to be made to
the two earliest kings, Alorus and Alaparus, of Babylon. Under the
"mediæval" are comprised the revelations received by Ammenon and Daonus
of Sippara, and lastly, under the "modern" the mysteries disclosed by
Dagon to Edorankhus of Sippara (p. 239). Hence we may assume that the
priests of Babylon arrived at an early age at a code which included
their creed and ritual, as it would seem, in seven books (p. 245). How
high the cosmogonies go, of which the most essential traits were found
in the fragments of Berosus (p. 238), we cannot decide. In the
conception which lies at the base of them the forces of nature are seen
pouring forth in wild confusion. The name of the woman who rules these
forces, or of this chaos inhabited by monsters, Omorka, has been
explained as "Homer-Kai," _i.e._, "material of the egg," the world-egg,
but more recently by "Um Uruk," _i.e._ "the mother," the "great goddess
of Erech." In the cosmogony of Berosus we can see, though in a very rude
and contradictory shape, the opposition of a material and intellectual,
a natural and supernatural principle, and later accounts maintain that
the Babylonians regarded the world as arising out of fire and water,
that Chaos and Love were the parents of Life and Contention, and of Life
and Contention Bel was the son.[388]

More important and far more valuable than these abstractions, to which
the Babylonians obviously attained only at a late period, and in all
probability under the influence of Greek ideas, are the results which
their knowledge and acuteness gained in other fields. The cuneiform
writing, according to the conclusions we have already been compelled to
draw, was borrowed by the Elamites and Babylonians from the earlier
inhabitants of the lower districts. It was originally a picture-writing,
which, like the Egyptian, passed from real pictures to indicatory and
symbolic pictures or picture-signs. The necessity of abbreviating and
compressing the picture-signs was here far more keenly felt than in
Egypt, quite irrespective of the fact that the strong pictorial
tendency of the Egyptians was probably wanting on the Lower Tigris. The
stones and slabs on which the Egyptians engraved their hieroglyphics
were not to be found in the plains of the two rivers, and the slabs of
mud, clay, and brick on which they were compelled to write (the pictures
and symbols were written on the soft slabs with the style, and these
were then burnt), were ill-adapted for sketches. Such obstinate material
made the abbreviation of the symbols an imperative necessity; and it was
by sharp and straight strokes that the signs could be most easily traced
upon slabs of mud and clay. The oldest bricks in the ruins of Mugheir,
Warka, and Senkereh display pictures in outline; then beside bricks with
inscriptions of this kind we find others repeating the same inscription
in cuneiform signs, which now form a completely ideographic system of
writing. The immediate comprehension of picture signs by the senses died
away owing to abbreviations of the kind mentioned, and the
picture-writing became symbolic writing. This writing, which consisted
of groups of cuneiform symbols, attained a higher stage of development
when a phonetic value was attributed to a part of the cuneiform groups,
whether used to signify nouns or verbs and adjectives, or new groups
were formed for this purpose. By cuneiform groups both simple and
compound syllables are expressed. For simple syllables, _i.e._ for those
consisting of a single consonant with a vowel before or after it in
order to give the consonant a sound, the cuneiform writing of Babylon
and Assyria possesses about one hundred groups, and several hundred
groups for compound syllables, _i.e._ for those which have more than one
consonant. Side by side with this syllabic writing the old abbreviated
picture-writing was retained. Certain words of frequent occurrence, as
king, battle, month, were always represented by picture signs, or
ideograms, and so also were the names of deities and most proper names.
The greater number of the cuneiform groups were then used in a phonetic
as well as an ideographic sense, and without any correlation between the
phonetic and actual meaning. Thus the symbol for the word "father" had
the phonetic value of the syllable _at_, but "father" in the Babylonian
language is _abu_. In Babylon this system of writing became even more
complicated by the fact that different meanings and different phonetic
values were ascribed to the same cuneiform groups. There are symbols
which have four different phonetic values and four different
meanings.[389] In order to lessen to some degree the great difficulty in
understanding the meaning which was caused by the varying use of the
same symbol as an ideogram and a sound, and the multiplicity of meanings
and sounds attached to certain signs--key-symbols were placed before the
names of gods, lands, cities, and persons, and occasionally one or more
syllables were attached to ideograms of more than one meaning, which
formed the termination of the word intended to be expressed by the
ideogram in the particular instance.

Complicated and difficult as this writing was, it was applied on a
considerable scale in Assyria and Babylonia, and it remained in use even
after the fall of the Babylonian empire, as is shown by bricks and
tablets of the time of Cyrus, Cambyses, Artaxerxes I., and the
Seleucidæ.[390] These are principally records of business or legal
matters, of which, in this way, a selection has come down to us
extending from the times of Hammurabi (p. 261) to the first century B.C.
The Armenians adopted this system from the Babylonians and Assyrians;
and they also made it shorter and simpler. In the same way the Medes and
Persians borrowed it. But in the Persian inscriptions of the Achæmenids
it has already become a mere phonetic mode of writing but little removed
from an ordinary alphabet. Beyond doubt the Babylonian system was known
to the Western Semitic tribes; it even passed over from Syria to Cyprus,
where we find it assuming a peculiar form, and displaying throughout the
character of a syllabic mode of writing. At the same time among the
Syrians and Phenicians a cursive method was developed, just as in Egypt
the hieratic writing grew up beside the hieroglyphic. This cursive
writing of the Western Semitic nations has not, however, arisen out of
the cuneiform symbols, but out of the hieratic writing of the Egyptians.
The Phenicians must claim the merit of having abbreviated still further,
for their own use, the cursive writing of the Egyptians. But the
picture-symbols of the hieratic writing were not merely contracted and
simplified; the mixture of pictorial, syllabic, and alphabetic
symbols--beyond which the Egyptians did not rise--was abandoned, and
then for the first time an alphabet was discovered. This Phenician
alphabet was in use in Syria as early as the year 1000 B.C.[391] In
Babylonia also this alphabetic writing was in use beside the cuneiform.
We find it in Babylon side by side with the corresponding cuneiform on a
weight, of which the inscription tells us: "Thirty minæ of standard
weight: the palace of Irba Merodach (Marduk) king of Babylon." The exact
date of this king cannot be ascertained: we only know that he must have
belonged to the old kingdom. Assyrian weights with inscriptions in the
Phenician alphabet, beside the cuneiform inscriptions, are found of the
eighth century B.C., the time of King Tiglath Pilesar II., Shalmanesar
IV., and Sennacherib.[392]

"It can be maintained with good reason," says Diodorus, "that the
Chaldæans are far before all other nations in their knowledge of the
heavens; and that they devoted the greatest attention and labour to this
science." At an early period, by comparing the course of the sun with
that of the moon, they had perceived that the sun returned to the same
position after passing through about twelve cycles of the moon; hence
they fixed the year at twelve months of thirty days, which they, by
intercalations of various kinds, brought into harmony with the
astronomical year of 365-1/4 days.[393] The observation, that the sun
after a course of twelve months returns to the same constellation, led
them on to determine the changing position of the sun in the other
months by constellations. Thus the Babylonians marked off the
constellations which seemed to touch nearest upon the course of the sun,
and arrived at the signs of the ecliptic or zodiac. Each of these twelve
stations through which the sun passed they again divided into thirty
parts. The week they fixed at seven days by the course of the moon; to
the day they allotted twelve hours, to correspond to the twelve months
of the year; the hours they divided into sixty parts, and each of these
sixtieths was again subdivided into sixty parts. Their measures were
also duodecimal. The cubit was twenty-four finger-breadths; and on the
same system, their numerals were based upon the _sossus_, or sixty,--a
derivative from twelve, and the _sarus_, or square of the _sossus_. When
they attempted to fix the position and intervals of the stars in the
sky, the basis taken for their measurements was the diameter of the sun.
They divided the daily course of the sun, like the ecliptic, into 360
parts, and then attempted to measure these at the equinox. At the moment
when the sun was seen in the sky on the morning of the equinox, a jar
filled with water was opened. From this the water was allowed to run
into a second small jar, till the orb of the sun was completely visible;
then it ran into a third and larger jar, till the sun was again seen on
the horizon on the following morning. They concluded that the diameter
of the sun must stand in the same proportion to the cycle it passed
through as the water in the small jar stood to the water in the large
one. Hence they found that the diameter of the sun was contained 720
times in its course, and this diameter they fixed at 1/30 of an
hour.[394] The observation that an active foot-courier could accomplish
a certain distance in the thirtieth part of an equinoctial hour, and
thirty times as much in the whole hour, supplied the Chaldæans with a
longitudinal measurement on the same basis. The measure of the hour was
the parasang (3/4 of a geographical mile), and the thirtieth part of the
parasang was the stadium. Till we obtain help from the inscriptions we
must remain acquainted only with the Persian name of the first measure
and the Greek name of the second. At the equator the sun was supposed in
every hour to traverse a distance of thirty stadia. On this system also
the Chaldæans fixed the length of their cubit. The stadium was divided
into 360 cubits, and the sixth part of the stadium, or plethron, into
sixty cubits, and the foot was fixed at 3/5 of this cubit. Consequently
the Babylonian cubit was fixed at twenty-one inches of our measure (525
millimeters).[395]

From this division of the sphere the Babylonians, though aided by very
simple instruments, the polus and gnomon,[396] arrived at very exact
astronomical observations and results. They discovered a period of 223
months, within which all eclipses of the moon occurred in a similar
number and equal extent. By means of this period they fixed the average
length of the synodic and periodic month with such accuracy that our
astronomers here found the first to be too large by four seconds only,
and the last by one second. Their observations of ten lunar eclipses,
and three conjunctions of planets and fixed stars, have come down to us.
The oldest of these observations is that of a lunar eclipse of the year
721 B.C., which took place "a good hour after midnight." The second took
place in 720 B.C., "about midnight;" the third in the same year "after
the rising of the moon." In these observations also our astronomers have
found but little to correct.

As the Chaldæans brought their measures of the sphere, of time and
length into correlation, so also they attempted to preserve the same
relation in their cubic measures and weights. For their weights and
cubic measures the division of the units into sixtieths (minæ, _i.e._
parts) was retained. The quadrantal, or _Maris_, contained one
Babylonian cubic foot, and the sixtieth part of this was the _Log_. The
weight in water of a Babylonian cubic foot was, according to the
statistics of our physicists, about sixty-six pounds (32,721
kilogrammes), but the Chaldæans reckoned it at only 60-3/5 pounds
(30,300 kilogrammes).[397]

The weight of the cubic measure was also the standard for imperial
weight in Babylonia. The oldest weight which we know dates from the time
of Ilgi, king of Ur. The stone, which in shape is not unlike a duck, has
the inscription: "Ten minæ of Ilgi."[398] There was a heavy talent
(Kikkar, _i.e._ "orb") arranged to weigh twice as much as the
quadrantal. Hence it weighed 121-1/5 pounds (60,600 kils.), and the
sixtieth, or mina, weighed over two pounds. The light talent weighed one
quadrantal, according to the estimate of the Chaldæans, _i.e._ 60-3/5
pounds, and the mina was a little heavier than a pound of our weight.
But in weighing the precious metals, the Chaldæans used units, which
differed from the imperial weights in use for all other purposes. They
calculated by little circular pieces, or rings, or bars (tongues) of
silver and gold, and the smallest of these was equivalent to the shekel,
or sixtieth part of the mina of the heavy talent. These shekels were the
commonest and most indispensable measure of value. It was found easier
to reckon by units of 3,000 shekels, than by units of 3,600. And so it
came about that the mina contained fifty shekels instead of sixty, and
the talent 3,000 shekels instead of 3,600. The three thousand shekels as
a whole, no longer weighed 121-1/5 pounds, but only 101 pounds, and the
mina, or sixtieth part, instead of weighing fully two pounds, weighed
only about 1-3/5 pounds.[399]

This weight, or the half of it (50-1/2 pounds), was retained for the
heavy and light gold talent. In the weight of silver trade caused a
further deviation. It was necessary to exchange gold and silver, and in
the East in antiquity the value of gold and silver was estimated at
13 : 1, or more accurately 13-1/3 : 1.[400] By making the silver shekel
(_i.e._ the fiftieth part of the silver mina), which corresponded to the
weight of the light gold talent, a little heavier, a silver coin was
obtained which stood to the fiftieth of the light gold mina, nearly in
the ratio of 10 : 1. Ten silver shekels of this weight could therefore
without any further trouble be exchanged for the fiftieth of the gold
mina, or gold shekel of the light gold talent. Hence arose a silver
talent of 67-1/3 pounds (33,660 kil.), a silver mina of 1-1/10 pound,
and a silver shekel of about eleven milligrammes.

FOOTNOTES:

[359] Diod. 2, 30.

[360] Nicol. Damasc. Fragm. 9, 10, ed. Müller.

[361] Pindari Fragm. adesp. 83, ed. Bergk.

[362] Schrader, "Assyr.-babyl. Keilschriften," s. 123; "Keilschriften
und Alt. Test." s. 280.

[363] G. Rawlinson, "Five Monarchies," p. 130.

[364] 2 Kings xvii. 31.

[365] Amos v. 26.

[366] Eberhard Schrader, "Theologg. Studien und Kritiken," 1874, 2, 324
ff.

[367] Schrader, "Keilschriften und Alt. Test." s. 167, 272;
"Assyr.-babyl. Keilschriften," s. 88, 129, 140.

[368] Ménant, "Babylone," pp. 201-203.

[369] Munter, "Religion der Babylonier," s. 28.

[370] Herod. 1, 199.

[371] Baruch, vi. 42, 43 (Ep. Jerem.); cf. Genesis xxxviii. 14 ff.

[372] Ménant, "Babylone," p. 204.

[373] Schrader, "Abstammung der Chaldæer," s. 405. So, too, Istar of
Agane is opposed to Istar of Erech.

[374] G. Smith, "Discov." p. 220; Schrader, "Höllenfahrt," p. 15 ff.

[375] Schrader, "Keilschriften und Alt. Test." s. 69, 85, 86.

[376] G. Smith, "Assurbanipal," p. 201.

[377] Diod. 2, 30.

[378] Plutarch, "De Isid." c. 48.

[379] Diod. 2, 30.

[380] Diod. 2, 31.

[381] Sayce, "Bibl. Arch." 3, p. 137.

[382] 2 Kings xxiii. 5-7.

[383] Diod. 2, 31.

[384] Stuhr, "Die Religionsysteme der Völker des Orients," 1, 424.

[385] Sayce, "Bibl. Archæol." 3, p. 153.

[386] Diod. 2, 30, 31; Daniel 4, 4.

[387] Above, p. 268; Strabo, p. 739.

[388] Movers, "Religion der Phoenizier," 2, 262, 275.

[389] Schrader, "Assyrisch. Babyl. Keilschriften," s. 105.

[390] G. Smith, "Discov." pp. 387, 388; Ménant, "Les Achæmenides."
Recently a tablet has been found, supposed to belong to the time of
Cæsar.

[391] De Rougé, "Sur l'Origine Egyptienne de l'Alphabet Phénicien;"
Lauth, "Sitzungsber. d. Bair. Akad. d." 10, 1867, pp. 84-124. The
inscription of Mesha, king of Moab, proves by the formation and use of
the letters that this alphabet had been known for a long time.

[392] The Basalt duck of Irba Marduk--no doubt a piece of Babylonian
booty--was found at Nineveh.--Layard, "Discoveries," p. 601; Schrader,
"Assyr. Babyl. Keilschrift," s. 175; De Vogué, "Rev. Arch." 11, 366.

[393] Ideler, "Handbuch der Chronologie," 1, 207; Sayce, "Bibl. Arch."
3, p. 160.

[394] Ideler, "Sternkunde der Chaldaer," s. 214.

[395] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 20 ff.

[396] Herod. 2, 109.

[397] Brandis, "Münzwesen Vorderasiens," s. 36 ff.

[398] George Smith, "Records of the Past." 3, 11.

[399] These statements are founded on the more recent forms established
by Brandis, "Münzwesen Vorderasiens," s. 158, ff.

[400] Brandis, _loc. cit._ s. 85.




CHAPTER III.

THE ART AND TRADE OF BABYLONIA.


Like the Pharaohs, the rulers of Babylon sought their fame in
magnificent buildings. But their works have not been able to withstand
the ravages of time with the same durability as the stone mountains and
porticoes on the Nile. The lower Euphrates does not lie, like the Nile,
between walls of rocks, from which the most beautiful and hardest stone
could be obtained. The plain of Babylonia afforded nothing but earth for
the bricks, which were sometimes burnt, sometimes dried in the sun; and
excellent mortar was to be obtained from the large asphalt pits on the
Euphrates, especially at Hit. Hence it was necessary to unite the walls
more strongly. In the palaces, and temples, the walls of brick were
covered with slabs of gypsum, or limestone, which must often have been
brought from a distance, and these slabs were then covered with
sculptures, like the stone walls of the Egyptian buildings. But more
commonly the ornaments on the inner walls, and occasionally even those
on the outer walls, consist of bricks coloured and glazed. Though the
material in Babylonia was more fragile than the granite of Egypt, the
extent, scale, and splendour of these buildings were so great, that
remains even of the oldest have come down to our time. The upper
portions of the brick walls have fallen down, and the ruins of the
Babylonian cities have thus for the most part become unsightly enough;
but not the less do they point out the positions of the old buildings,
and under the heaps are hidden the most valuable remains of those
ancient periods.

As has been already remarked, the cities in the south of Babylonia are
the first to emerge in the progress of the country. The oldest princes
call themselves kings of Ur and Nipur; they build at Ur, at Nipur, at
Erech, and at Senkereh, between Erech and Ur. Not till the time of
Hammurabi, and perhaps through his power, did Babylon become the centre
and metropolis of the kingdom. He and his successors built at Babylon,
Borsippa, Sippara, and Kutha, as well as in the southern cities. The
universal characteristic of these buildings, so far as the remains allow
us to pass any judgment, is the extraordinary strength of the walls and
the obvious effort to obtain, by placing one story of solid masonry upon
another, higher positions, better air, and a more extensive view in the
level plain. The temples seem almost universally to be built in this
tower-like style, either in order to be nearer the gods in the purer and
higher air, or because the gods, as spirits of the heaven, and as bright
luminaries of the sky, received the sacrifices here offered to them, and
the prayers hence addressed to them with greater favour. On the inside
their structures were built of square bricks three or four inches in
thickness, and on the outside these bricks are lined with burnt tiles.
The tiles almost invariably carry in the middle the impression of the
stamp of the king who used them.

The ruins of Ur (Mugheir), on the western bank of the Euphrates, occupy
a considerable space, shut in by the remains still traceable, of a
wall, running in an oval shape, and from three to four miles in
circumference. Amid these ruins rises, to the north-west, a heap of
bricks and broken tiles, which is even now about 70 feet above the
surface of the plain. On a plateau about 20 feet in height is a
rectangular building, with the four sides directed exactly to the four
quarters of the sky. The two longer sides are about 200 feet in length,
the shorter sides are about 130 feet. It was a solid mass of brick,
joined with bitumen, about 27 feet high; the outer walls, of burnt
tiles, are about 10 feet thick. Buttresses of eight feet in breadth
surround the whole story at short distances. The centre of the structure
is pierced by narrow air-passages extending from one side to the other.
On this story is a second, 120 feet in length by 75 feet in breadth, and
even now about 17 feet high. The ruins lying on this point to a third
story, which may have contained the actual temple. There are traces
still remaining of the entrance, which led up from the outside. The
tiles of the lower story bear the stamp, "Urukh, king of Ur, has erected
the temple of the god Sin;" on those of the upper story we find, "Ilgi,
king of Ur, king of Sumir, and Accad." This building was, therefore, the
temple of Sin, which Urukh commenced and his son Ilgi continued and
completed--a fact which is further proved by the inscriptions of
Nabonetus, the last king of Babylon, which were found in these ruins. To
the south-east of this structure lies a platform, faced with tiles, 400
feet in circuit, which probably supported another temple or a palace.
The foundation walls of various chambers can still be traced. Similar
structures are found in the ruins of Abu Shahrein, south of Mugheir on
the Euphrates. From a wide platform rises a square structure surrounded
by a wall, in which are the remains of decorated chambers. North of Ur,
on the east bank of the Euphrates, the remains of Senkereh form a
circular plateau, not quite five miles in circumference; the ruins rise
gradually towards the centre, which is marked by the remains of a
structure 320 feet long and 220 broad, the walls of which, on one side,
still rise 70 feet over the plain. In these and the other ruins of
Senkereh inscriptions are found in considerable numbers, which give us
the names of kings from Urukh to Cambyses.

In the ruins of Erech (Uruk, Warka), above Senkereh, on the eastern bank
of the Euphrates, are found the remains of an outer wall, broken by
semicircular towers open to the city. This wall forms an irregular
circle of more than five miles in circumference. Here and there the
ruins are still about 40 feet high. Within the wall are three heaps of
ruins. On the highest, which forms an exact square of more than 200 feet
at the base, we may trace the ruins of a second story. This heap is
about 100 feet in height. It consists of bricks alternating with layers
of reeds at intervals of four or five feet in height. Here also there
are buttresses, in which the tiles are cemented with bitumen. To the
west lie the remains of an oblong structure of double the size. The
ruins of Nipur are sixty miles to the north of Erech, in the land
between the Euphrates and the Tigris. Here are several rounded heaps,
but they are of less extent than the remains of Ur, Senkereh, and Erech.

The heaps of ruins which rise out of the plains some miles to the
south-west of Babylon--the Arabs call them Birs Nimrud, _i.e._ "the
fortress of Nimrod"--exhibit the same plan of structure as the ruins of
the temples at Ur and Erech. Within a square wall, on a platform of
brick, rises a square story, 272 feet on every side, and 26 feet in
height; over this is a second story, of the same height, but forming a
square of 230 feet only, and not placed exactly in the middle of the
lower story, but in such a manner that on one side it recedes 12 feet
only, but on the other 30 feet from the edge of the lower plateau. In
the same way the third and still smaller story rests on the second. It
is of the same height as the others. The fourth story is only 15 feet in
height. The loose mass of ruins does not allow us to trace any more
stories. Hence the building in all probability consisted of seven
stories. It appears that these ruins, like the extensive heaps of
remains lying to the east of them (Tel Ibrahim), mark the site of the
ancient Borsippa. The tiles of the stories, which lie one over the
other, bear the stamp of Nebuchadnezzar II., and in the angles of the
building cylinders have been discovered,[401] on which Nebuchadnezzar
relates that the temple of the seven lamps of the earth, the tower of
Borsippa, which an earlier king had commenced but not completed, and
which had fallen into decay for many years, was again erected by him,
and the pinnacles covered with copper. In his great inscription of
Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar further tells us that he "restored the marvel of
Borsippa, the temple of the seven spheres of the sky and of the earth,
and covered the pinnacles with copper." In the same inscription it is
said that Nebuchadnezzar built temples at Borsippa to the goddess Nana,
to Adar, Bin, and Sin, and that he restored and completed Beth-Sida,
_i.e._ the chief temple of Nebo at Borsippa; nevertheless we may be
certain, from the cylinders actually found in the ruins, that the
remains are those of the temple of the seven lamps.[402]

Turning from Borsippa to Babylon, we find Herodotus describing the
largest temple of the city in the following manner:--"The sanctuary of
Zeus Belus--it is in existence still--forms a square of two stadia on
every side, and is furnished with iron gates. In the midst is a massive
tower, a stadium in the square. Over this tower stands another, and
again another, till there are eight towers, one over the other. They are
ascended from the outside, and the ascent goes up round all the towers.
Half-way up there is a resting-place, and seats for those who are
ascending. On the highest tower is a large temple, and in the temple a
large and beautifully-prepared bed, and beside it a golden table. There
is no image there, nor does anyone watch there through the night except
a woman of the country, whom, as the Chaldæan priests say, their god has
chosen out of all the land. They also declare, though I do not believe
it, that the god sometimes comes into the temple and rests on the bed.
In this sanctuary there is also another temple below, and in this there
is a great image of the seated Zeus, of gold, and a large golden table;
the footstool and seat are also of gold; and altogether, as the
Chaldæans say, the amount of gold used is 800 talents. Outside this
temple is a golden altar, on which only sucking creatures may be
sacrificed, and also a larger altar, where the full-grown animals are
sacrificed. On this the Chaldæans burn in every year 1,000 talents of
incense when they celebrate the festival of the god. Here was another
golden image of the god, 12 cubits high. But this I did not see; I only
repeat what the Chaldæans told me. This image Xerxes had taken away.
Such were the adornments of the temple, and besides these there were in
it many dedicatory offerings given by individuals."[403]

Diodorus, who wrote four hundred years later than Herodotus,
relates:--"In the middle of the city was the sanctuary of Zeus, whom the
Babylonians call Belus. But as the writers give different accounts of
the temple, and the structure has fallen from age, it is not possible to
say anything certain about it. Yet they agree that it was extremely
high, and that the Chaldæans here made their observations of the stars,
as the height of the building enabled them to observe accurately their
rising and setting. The whole building is said to have been constructed
of burnt brick and bitumen, with great skill and much ornament. On the
top were three statues of Zeus, Hera, and Rhea, of beaten gold. The
statue of Zeus represented him standing and advancing. It was 40 feet
high and 1,000 Babylonian talents in weight. Of the same weight was the
statue of Rhea, in which the goddess was seated on a golden throne.
Beside her knees were two lions, and close at hand two very large
serpents of silver, each weighing 30 talents. The standing figure of
Hera weighed 800 talents; in her right hand she held a serpent by the
head, and in the left a sceptre studded with precious stones. Before
these statues was a common table of beaten gold, 40 feet long and 15
feet broad, and 500 talents in weight. On the table were two chalices,
each 30 talents in weight. There also were two vessels for incense, each
30 talents in weight, and three great jars, of which that consecrated to
Zeus was 1,200 talents in weight, and the two others 600 talents
each."[404] Strabo contents himself with the remark: "The now ruined
grave of Belus was a square pyramid of burnt bricks. It was a stadium in
height, and a stadium on every side. Alexander intended to rebuild it,
but the work was enormous, and required a long time; the removal of the
debris alone employed 10,000 workmen for two months, so that he could
not bring it to an end, for soon after he fell sick and died."[405] What
Diodorus tells us of the many thousand talents of gold, of the statues
and utensils on the top of the temple-tower, is borrowed from Ctesias,
and belongs to the romance or poetry of the East from the time of the
empire of the Medes. But we cannot doubt that there was a considerable
amount of gold in the greatest sanctuary at Babel. The seated image of
gold in the lower temple, which Herodotus saw, weighed, according to the
Chaldæans, 800 talents, _i.e._, on the light imperial scale, 50,000
pounds.

It was this magnificent temple at Babylon to which the tradition of the
Hebrews has attached the account of the building of that tower in the
plain of Shinar of which the top should reach heaven. The mighty men,
the giants of the ancient days, desired to climb heaven. Their insolence
and wicked purpose was punished by the confusion of language and the
dispersion of mankind. Josephus makes Nimrod, as the founder of the
kingdom of Babylon, the promoter of this wicked scheme. Nimrod intended
the tower to be so high that a second flood could not reach the top, and
thus men would be able to bid defiance to the gods, and yet be secure
against a second destruction.[406]

Let us now inquire what conclusions, if any, can be derived from the
inscriptions about the great temple of Babylon. From ancient times there
was at this place a sanctuary of the name of Beth-Sagall, or
Beth-Saggatu, _i.e._ "House of the Height." Whether this was erected as
early as Hammurabi is doubtful; but an inscription of his successor
tells us that he set up the image of the god Merodach (Marduk) in
Beth-Sagall.[407] These inscriptions of king Esarhaddon, who ruled over
Assyria and Babylonia from 681 B.C. to 668 B.C., tell us that "he caused
tiles to be made in Babylon for Beth-Saggatu, the temple of the great
gods."[408] After the restoration of the Babylonian empire
Nebuchadnezzar always calls himself in his inscriptions, "Supporter of
Beth-Saggatu, and Beth-Sida." Beth-Sida, _i.e._ "House of Prosperity,"
or "House of the Right Hand," was the name of the rich temple of Nebo at
Borsippa. "Like a pious man," says Nebuchadnezzar in one of his
inscriptions, "I have dealt towards Beth-Saggatu, and towards Beth-Sida.
I have magnified the splendour of the god Merodach, and the god Nebo, my
lords: I have completed Beth-Sida, the eternal house, where Nebo and
Nana are enthroned, at Borsippa."[409] "I have set up Beth-Saggatu, and
beautified it; Beth-Sida I have completed."[410] On the cylinders found
in the ruins of the temple of the seven lamps, Nebuchadnezzar says:
"Beth-Saggatu is the temple of the Heaven and the Earth, the dwelling of
Merodach, the lord of the gods, and with pure gold have I caused the
temple to be covered, where his splendour rests; the temple of the
foundations of the earth, the tower of Babylon, I have restored, with
tiles and copper I have completed it, and raised its summit."[411] The
chief inscription on the stone of black basalt relates at greater length
how Nebuchadnezzar adorned the sanctuary in Beth-Saggatu, where Merodach
rested; how he set up the marvel of Babylon, the temple of the
foundations of the heaven and the earth; how he raised the summit with
tiles and copper. The description of this erection concludes with the
satisfaction felt in seeing that Beth-Saggatu was now completed.[412]
And not only does Nebuchadnezzar boast of the care and attention
bestowed by him on Beth-Sida and Beth-Saggatu. The prince before whose
arms the creation of Nebuchadnezzar, the restored kingdom of Babylon,
was overthrown--Cyrus, the Persian, calls himself on the stamp of a tile
at Senkereh, "Kuru, supporter of Beth-Saggatu and Beth-Sida, son of
Kambuzija."[413]

This series of evidence shows that the lofty temple of Belus, which
Herodotus has described for us above, was to the Babylonians "the House
of the Height," the temple of Bel Merodach (p. 268), and that it was the
first of the three temples in which the kings of Assyria sacrificed when
they trod the soil of Babylon at the head of their victorious armies,
or as sovereigns; and that of these three rich temples, _i.e._ the
temple of Nergal at Kutha, Beth-Sida, the temple of Nebo at Borsippa,
and Beth-Saggatu, the temple of Merodach at Babel, the latter was
certainly the most wealthy. Moreover, the inscriptions show that the
foundation goes back as far as the times of king Hammurabi, whose
accession we found it possible--on hypothesis only, it is true--to place
in the year 1976 B.C. But even the Hebrew narrative of the building of
the Tower of Babel, which must have been written down before 1,000 B.C.
(below, chap. vii.) proves, in this respect harmonising with the
inscriptions, that long before this time there must have been in Babylon
a structure of great height, but unfinished.

Herodotus, in his description of Babylon, tells us that the Tower of
Belus was on one side of the Euphrates, and the royal castle on the
other. On which side each of these lay, he does not state. Xenophon
speaks of the palace of Babylon, and beside this of special
castles.[414] From the accounts of those who accompanied Alexander, it
is clear that there were two royal castles in Babylon, one on the right
hand and one on the left of the Euphrates, which certainly were not
built under the Achæmenids. Berosus tells us that Nebuchadnezzar built
himself a palace beside that of his father Nabopolassar. The
inscriptions of Nebuchadnezzar speak repeatedly of the continuation of
the palace at Babylon which his father had begun.[415] As the two great
heaps of ruins on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, El Kasr and Amran
ibn Ali, exhibit on the tiles found there the stamp of Nebuchadnezzar,
this palace of the ruler of the restored kingdom must have lain on the
east bank of the Euphrates. Diodorus describes the two castles of
Babylon, of which one was on the east and the other on the west bank of
the river; while both were adorned with various ornaments. "That in the
part lying towards the west" had a circuit of sixty stades, inclosed by
lofty and costly walls. These were followed by a second circular wall,
on the rude bricks of which various kinds of animals were stamped, and
brought into a resemblance with the reality by the painter's art. The
circumference was forty stades in length, and the wall was three hundred
bricks in thickness; the height, according to Ctesias, was fifty
fathoms, and the tower rose to sixty fathoms. The third interior wall
which surrounded the buildings was twenty stades in circuit, but in
height and thickness it surpassed the middle wall. On this and the
towers belonging to it animals of all kinds were depicted with
considerable skill in form and colour. The whole exhibited a chase, full
of many different animals, which were of more than four cubits in size.
Among these was a queen on horseback, who threw her dart at a panther;
and at hand was the king, who thrust at a lion with his lance. This
palace surpassed both in size and beauty the palace on the other side of
the Euphrates. Here the exterior wall of burnt tiles was only thirty
stades in circumference, and instead of the numerous animals were bronze
statues of a king and a queen and of governors, and also a bronze statue
of Zeus, whom the Babylonians call Belus. But in the interior were
military evolutions and hunting scenes of every kind, which gave varied
amusement to the spectator.[416] Ctesias, whom Diodorus followed in
his description of the palace on the west bank, as in his account of the
treasures in the Tower of Belus (p. 293), has also borrowed, in his
description of this castle, the erection of which he ascribes to Ninus,
from the Medo-Persian Epos, and this, as I shall show below, endeavoured
to place the glory of Ninus and Semiramis in the most brilliant light.
Hence, though here, as in the account of the treasures, considerable
deductions are to be made, we can nevertheless recognise the fact that
the castle of the ancient kings of Babylon on the western bank of the
Euphrates was of considerable size, magnificent, and well fortified,
although the remains now in existence are fewer and far smaller than
those of the palace of Nebuchadnezzar on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, where the painted and glazed tiles also confirm what Diodorus
says of the battle and hunting scenes of this palace. If the ancient
royal castle lay on the western bank, the Tower of Belus rose opposite
it on the eastern bank. This is proved by an inscription of
Nebuchadnezzar, in which we are told:--"In order to protect Beth-Saggatu
more strongly, and secure it from the attack of the enemy, I have
erected a second wall, the wall of the rising sun, which no king had
built before me."[417] Hence we may with certainty affirm that the most
northern of the heaps on the eastern bank of the Euphrates, the heap of
Babil, the summit of which still rises 140 feet above the river, is the
remains of the great tower of Bel Merodach.

The ancient kings of Babylon, Hammurabi and his successors, not only
built temples and palaces, but also fortresses. Hammurabi has himself
already told us, that he built the fortress of Ummubanit, "the towers
of which were as high as mountains." Kurigalzu built the fortress of
this name (Akerkuf, p. 262). Of the extensive walls of Ur and Erech we
have already spoken, and Sennacherib could boast of having taken
eighty-nine fortresses in Babylonia (p. 258).

Herodotus observes that in Babylonia the river (Euphrates) does not
overflow into the fields spontaneously, as in Egypt. It is not so active
as the Nile, and the water has to be raised artificially by hand, and by
wheels.[418] The provision of a sufficient supply of water for the land
was not neglected by the kings. We have already seen (p. 261) that king
Hammurabi boasted to have supplied Sumir and Accad with water for ever.
The canal system of Babylonia began about 150 miles above the
metropolis.[419] The main object was to protect the plain from the rapid
floods of the Euphrates by dams, and to moderate the flow of the
inundation. Reservoirs were required to receive the water of the
overflow, and preserve it against the time of drought. It was also
necessary to carry the water as far as the middle of the plain, which in
ordinary years it failed to reach, to form a network of canals to convey
water from the Euphrates even when there was no inundation, and finally
to dig trenches to remove the water from districts where it lay too
long, and to drain the broad marshes on the lower river near the mouth
of the Euphrates. From the inscription of Hammurabi, and the numerous
remains of dams and canals, we may conclude that the kings of Babylon
constructed large and comprehensive works of this kind, which were of
use not in agriculture only, but for commerce also. The brief duration
of the later restoration of the kingdom could not allow time to complete
the greater part of the vast structures and conduits, of which traces
and ruins are still in existence. The canal Naarsares, which was carried
from the Euphrates above Babylon toward the west, and ran parallel to
the stream till within a short distance of the mouth; the canal
Pallakopas, which was derived from the main stream 100 miles below
Babylon, and emptied into the Chaldæan lakes, in order to convey to them
the excess of water from the Euphrates; and three junction canals above
Babylon between the Euphrates and Tigris, from which trenches branched
off for irrigation, appear to belong to the time of the ancient kingdom
(see below). These labours of the princes, the numerous dams and "waters
of Babylon," attained their object. Babylonia was a garden where the
land brought forth more abundant fruits than in Egypt.

Very few relics are left of the sculpture of the Babylonians. If we set
aside a few sketches on cylinders and seals, we have no means of knowing
at first hand the images of their gods. The form of the god Nebo on the
cylinder of Urukh has been already mentioned (p. 260). The finished
statues cannot have been very different from the images of the Assyrian
gods and the statues of Nebo (p. 267). The remains of the ornaments of
the friezes in the palaces of Babylon are scarcely to be distinguished
from Assyrian sculptures. They are bearded, long-haired heads of serious
expression, with tall, upright headdresses. Beyond these only a few
figures in clay have been preserved, which are not without a certain
truth of nature, though exaggerated, and a rude though powerful lion of
stone standing over a prostrate man, from the ruins of Babylon. Whether
we regard it as unfinished, or as belonging to the infancy of art, this
work is all that we possess of full figures in stone, except a duck,
intended for use as a weight (p. 282). The human forms on the numerous
seal cylinders are often sketched in rude, childish outlines. On the
other hand, the single relief of a king of Babylon hitherto discovered,
though massive, is of artistic and neat workmanship. The king wears a
long and very richly-adorned robe with close sleeves, which are fastened
by bracelets round the knuckles. The robe reaches to the ankles, over
which come the richly embroidered shoes. The head is covered by a tall,
upright tiara, on which are horses with wings and horns. The king has a
bow in his left hand, and two arrows in his right; in his girdle is a
dagger. It appears to be an image of Mardukidinakh, the opponent of
Tiglath Pilesar I. of Assyria (p. 262). The forms of the animals in the
reliefs, and the cylinders, are lively in conception and vigorous in
workmanship; they consist of dogs, birds, apes, deer, and antelopes.
Humorous sketches of animals in caricature are also found on cylinders,
and the earrings and ornaments, found in the ruins, are, in part, of
delicate workmanship.

The most remarkable remains in the ruins of Ur and Erech are the tombs.
At Ur, outside the wall already mentioned, there is a broad band of
sepulchres encircling the ruins of the wall. The tombs are chambers of
seven feet in length, three to four feet in breadth, and five feet in
height. The roofs are formed by tiles projecting in successive layers
over the walls, and thus gradually approaching each other. The floors
are also covered with tiles. On the tiles lay a mat of reeds, and on
this the corpse was placed, generally turned to the left side, with the
head on a brick; the right arm, laid towards the left over the breast,
rests the fingers on the edge of a copper saucer. Clay vessels for food
and drink are found on the walls. In the ruins of Erech the whole space
between the three prominent heaps of ruins and the external walls is
filled with tombs, bones, and relics of the dead. The coffins here are
receptacles partly oval, made of burnt clay in a single piece, about
seven feet long, two and a half broad, and two to three feet high,
contracting towards the top; and partly narrow funnel-shaped vessels of
clay rounded off at both ends and united in the middle, in which the
body was closely fitted. The position of the skeletons and objects round
them are the same in the oval coffins as in the brick vaults. As a rule
these coffins are not found under the surface, but in raised brick
buildings. They lie thickly together, and often in several rows, one
upon the other. Relics of weapons, necklaces, and bracelets, gold and
silver rings for the fingers and toes, and other ornaments, are found in
these sepulchres.[420]

The industry of the Babylonians quickly attained great skill and wide
development. They were famous for their weaving in wool and linen. The
nations of the West agree in acknowledging the excellence of the cloths
and coloured stuffs of Babylonia. Their pottery was excellent and the
manufacture active; the preparation of glass was not unknown; the
ointments prepared in Babylon were famous and much sought after, and the
stones cut there were highly valued. The products of Babylonian skill
and industry were first brought to their kinsmen in Syria, who could
offer oil and wine in exchange. In the Hebrew scriptures we find
Babylonian cloaks in use in Syria before the immigration of the Hebrews
into Canaan.[421] How active the commerce between Babylonia and Syria
was even before that date is proved by the circumstance that the tribute
which in the sixteenth century B.C. was received by Tuthmosis III. from
Syria is put down on the inscriptions at Karnak (p. 135) in part in
weight by the mina, and in part, when reduced from the Egyptian to the
Babylonian weight, gives round sums corresponding to the Babylonian
weight, from which the conclusion can be drawn that the imperial
Babylonian weight and the Babylonian money weight were already in use in
Syria about this time. That the trade mina of the Syrians was the
sixtieth part of the heavy (weight) talent of the Babylonians is
ascertained; but the heavy and light gold talent, as well as the silver
talent of 67-1/3 pounds, must, according to these deductions, have been
known to the Syrians about this date.[422] Afterwards the Hebrews put
their gold shekel, on the basis of the heavy gold talent of Babylon, at
the fiftieth part of the mina of this talent. Besides the silver talent
of Babylonia, there was also a heavy silver talent of about ninety
pounds (44,760 kil.) in use in Syria. This came into existence because
in Syria fifteen, and not ten, silver pieces (fiftieths of the mina)
were equal to the fiftieth of the heavy gold mina (1-3/5 pounds),
(p. 285).[423] Along with their weights the Syrians also adopted the
cubic measures of the Babylonians.

The rough material required by Babylonian industry was supplied in the
first place by the Arabs, who exchanged their animals, skins, and wool
for corn and weapons. Wine, and more especially wood, of which there was
none in Babylonia, were brought by the Armenians from their valleys in
the north down the Euphrates to Babylon.[424] Before 1500 B.C. the
commerce of the Arabs brought the products of South Arabia, the spices
of Yemen, and even the products and manufactures of India, especially
their silks, which reached the coasts of Southern Arabia (see below), to
Babylon. The Babylonians required the perfumes of Arabia and India to
prepare their ointments. In order to prepare the best or royal ointment,
twenty-five of the most precious perfumes were mixed together.[425] When
the cities of Phenicia became great centres of trade which carried the
wares of Babylonia by sea to the West in order to obtain copper in
exchange, the trade between Babylonia and Syria must have become more
lively still. It was the ships of the Phenicians which brought the cubic
measure, and the weights, and the cubit of Babylonia to the shores of
Greece, and caused them to be adopted there. In the ninth or eighth
century B.C. the Greeks completely dropped their old measures of length
and superficies, and fixed their stadium at 360 Babylonian cubits, their
plethrum at the length and the square of sixty Babylonian cubits, and
regulated the Greek foot by the Babylonian at a measure from 308 to 315
millimeters, and made their cubit equal to one and a half of these
feet.[426] The light Babylonian talent became known in Greece under the
name of the Euboeic talent, while the Greek city Phocæa, on the
shores of Asia Minor, struck the oldest Greek coin, the Phocæan stater,
at the value of a fiftieth of the heavy gold mina of Babylon (1-3/5
pounds). Chios, Clazomenæ, and Lampsacus followed the heavy Syrian
silver talent in their coinage; and lastly, Croesus made his gold
stater equal to the fiftieth part of the mina of the light Babylonian
gold talent (50-1/2 pounds), and his silver stater equal to the fiftieth
part of the mina of the Babylonian silver talent of 67-1/3 pounds.[427]

FOOTNOTES:

[401] H. Rawlinson, "Journ. Asiat. Soc." 1861, 18, 2 ff.

[402] The assumption that the Birs Nimrud is the temple Beth-Sida at
Borsippa is contradicted by the inscriptions. The measurements of the
temple give no support for such a theory, even if the forty-two cubits
of the cylinders of Rawlinson are interpreted with Norris, "Dict." p.
280, by Amatgagar; for we do not know the value of this measure exactly.
I cannot regard Borsippa as a part of Babylon in the teeth of the direct
testimony of Strabo (p. 728), Justin (12, 13), and Ptolemy (5, 20). The
inscriptions of the Assyrians, and, not least, those of Nebuchadnezzar
himself, always mention Borsippa beside Babylon. If it be maintained
that in spite of this Nebuchadnezzar might have included Borsippa in the
walls of Babylon, the theory is contradicted by Berosus (Joseph, "c.
Apion." 1, 20), according to whom Cyrus besieges and takes Babylon while
Nabonetus is blocked up in Borsippa, and by Nebuchadnezzar himself, who,
after speaking of the great walls of Babylon, adds:--"I also laid the
foundations of the walls of Borsippa, the Tabi-subur-su" (Ménant,
"Babylone," p. 205).

[403] Herod. 1, 181-183.

[404] Diod. 2, 9.

[405] Strabo, p. 738.

[406] "Antiq." 1, 4.

[407] G. Smith, "Records of the Past," 5, 69, 73.

[408] Aberdeen inscription in Ménant, "Annal." p. 248.

[409] Cylinder Phillips in Ménant, "Babylone," pp. 210, 211.

[410] Cylinder of the British Museum in Ménant, p. 212.

[411] Ménant, "Babylone," p. 216.

[412] Ménant, _loc. cit._ p. 202.

[413] "Transactions Bibl. Arch." 2, 148.

[414] "Cyr. Inst." 7, 5.

[415] Cylinder Grotefend, in Oppert, "Exped." 1, 232. Chief inscription
in Ménant, p. 206.

[416] Diod. 2, 8.

[417] Cylinder Phillips, in Ménant, "Babylone," p. 210.

[418] Herod. 1, 193. 2, 11.

[419] Xen. "Anab." 1, 7; Ammian, 24, 3; Strabo, p. 748, puts the borders
of Babylon at a canal, 18 schoenes, _i.e._ 135 miles above Seleucia,
and Seleucia was somewhat higher than Babylon.

[420] W. K. Loftus, "Warka, its Ruins and Remains;" "Transactions of the
Royal Society," 2, 6, 1-64.

[421] Joshua, vii. 21.

[422] Brandis, "Münzwesen." s. 93.

[423] Brandis, _loc. cit._ s. 105 ff.

[424] Herod. 1, 194.

[425] Movers, "Phoenizier," 2, 3, 103.

[426] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 21 ff.

[427] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 71, 107, 121.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ARABS.


The Arabian peninsula is a repetition of Africa on a smaller scale and
in more moderate proportions, without a river-valley like that of the
Nile. The centre is occupied by a table-land, which presents a few
well-watered depressions lying under a burning sky between naked
deserts, plains of sand, cliffs, and bald peaks. Thus, in spite of the
great extent of the country (more than 1,000,000 square miles), there
are few districts in the interior of Arabia suitable for agriculture.
But towards the south, on the Indian Ocean, the plateau sinks down to
the sea in broad mountain terraces. Here are extremely fertile valleys,
and the most valuable fruits grow on the terraces in the tropic
atmosphere, which is cooled by the elevation of the mountains and the
winds blowing from the ocean. This is the land of frankincense, of the
sugarcane and coffee-tree, of pomegranates, figs, and dates, of wheat
and maize.

Herodotus, who follows all antiquity in extending the name Arabia to the
deserts of Syria and Sinai, gives us but few notices of the inhabitants
of this wide district. "The Arabs," he tells us, "wear long garments,
and on the right side carry large bows, which can be strung on either
side, and travel on swift camels. They have only two gods--Dionysus,
whom they call Urotal; and Urania, whom they call Alilat. Urania is
known to the Babylonians as Mylitta, to the Arabs as Alilat. Bargains
are struck in the following manner. A third person makes an incision in
the hand near the thumb of each of the two persons who wish to enter
into the compact, and with the blood he smears seven stones lying
between them; calling at the same time on Urotal and Alilat. These
compacts are observed with a sanctity unknown to any other nation."[428]
Eratosthenes tells us that the Arab tribes lying next to the Syrians and
Jews were agricultural, but beyond them lay a sandy and poor soil, with
nothing but a few palms, acacias, tamarisks, and wells of water. This
district, as far as the Euphrates, was inhabited by the Nabatæans,
Agræans, and Chaulotæans, tribes who kept camels and lived in
tents.[429] Artemidorus of Ephesus calls Arabia rich in cattle, lions,
panthers, wolves, wild asses, and camels; the inhabitants were wandering
herdmen, who gained a subsistence from their camels; on them they rode,
from them they fought, and on their milk and flesh they lived. The names
of the Arabian tribes he is unwilling to mention, because of their
insignificance and harsh sound.[430] Diodorus also tells us that the
inhabitants of the part of Arabia towards Syria lived by agriculture and
trade, but with the Nabatæans the land began to be arid and barren; and
they led the life of robbers, plundering their neighbours far and wide;
no one had succeeded in conquering them.[431] The interior of Arabia,
and the western side, were occupied by plains of sand of enormous
extent. On these it was only possible to travel as on the sea, by taking
the Great Bear as a guide. In the whole of the interior there were no
cities, but only dwellers in tents, and the most part of the Arabian
tribes led a nomadic life, for Arabia was very rich in animals of
various kinds, so that the Arabs could easily live on them without
cultivating corn. They had large herds of cattle, and with these they
wandered over immeasurable plains. In conclusion, Diodorus praises the
fertility and beauty of a well-watered palm-grove in the peninsula
between the northern bays of the Arabian Sea, which the barbarians had
very justly consecrated to the gods, as it lay in the midst of a very
hot and desert land, surrounded by a wilderness. There was an old altar
there of hard stone inscribed with very ancient letters, which no one
could read. A man and woman presided for life as priests over this holy
palm-grove, and every four years the neighbouring Arab tribes sacrificed
hecatombs of goodly camels there.[432] Pliny observes: "Strange to say,
the Arabs live about equally on plunder and on trade; what they get from
their forests (by which is meant the products of the date-palms and the
fruit-trees of South Arabia) and from the sea they sell; but they
purchase nothing in return."[433] "The Arabs," says Ammianus
Marcellinus, "extend from the Euphrates to Egypt. They are half-naked,
with only a coloured apron round the body reaching to the middle. Every
man is a warrior. On their swift fine-limbed horses and their camels
they ride in every direction. They do not continue long in any one
place: without settled abodes they wander to and fro, and their whole
life is nothing but a flight. Of bread and wine the most part of them
know nothing whatever."[434]

Of the southern coasts of Arabia the accounts are different. It is a
remark of Herodotus that the fairest blessings are allotted to the
extreme limits of the earth; and among other places to Arabia, the
southern extremity of the inhabited world. Here only, in all the earth,
grow frankincense, myrrh, cassia, and ladanum; here are sheep with such
thick tails, that carriages have to be fastened behind them. But the
frankincense trees are watched by winged serpents, and the cassia by
bats. Cinnamon does not grow in Arabia, but large carnivorous birds of
prey brought branches of cinnamon for their nests,--from which direction
the Arabs could not tell.[435] Heraclides of Cyme gave an account of the
wealth of the king of the land of frankincense. He pretended to know
that the expenses for the king, his wife, and friends, amounted each day
to the sum of fifteen Babylonian talents. Living an effeminate and
luxurious life, he always remained in the palace; he did nothing, and
was never seen by the people; but if anyone went into the palace to
complain of a decision at law, the king himself passed sentence.[436]
Through the trade connection of Alexandria Eratosthenes obtained better
information on these districts, and was enabled to mention the tribes
who possessed the south. "In the extreme end of Arabia next the sea
dwell the Minæans, whose metropolis is Karna; after these come the
Sabæans, whose metropolis is Mariaba; further to the west, as far as the
corner of the Arabian Gulf, are the Cattabani, whose kings dwell at
Thamna; finally, the Chatramites are furthest to the east, and their
city is Sabbatha. Each of these four districts is larger than the Delta
of Egypt; they have rain in the summer, and rivers which lose
themselves in the plains and lakes. Hence the land is so fruitful that
seed is sown twice in the year. The land of the Cattabani supplies
incense, the Chatramites produce myrrh; but elsewhere also fruits of
every kind are plentiful and cattle abundant. From the Chatramites it is
a journey of forty days to the Sabæans; from the Minæans the merchants
go in seventy days to Aela (Elath). The cities of the Chatramites,
Cattabani, Sabæans, and Minæans are rich, and adorned with temples and
royal palaces."[437] The Sabæans, the most numerous tribe of Arabia,
according to Agatharchides, who wrote in the second half of the second
century B.C., inhabited the so-called Arabia Felix. Here grew the most
beautiful fruits without number; here was an inexhaustible abundance of
animals of every kind. In the strips of land by the sea grew balsam and
cassia, and another plant most beautiful to the eye. In the interior
were thick forests of tall frankincense and myrrh-trees, and also
cinnamon-trees, palm and calmus, and trees of a similar kind, which,
like the others, send forth the sweetest odour. Owing to the innumerable
multitude, it is not possible to name and describe every species. The
perfume is divine and beyond all words. Even those who go past on the
coast, at a distance from the land, enjoy this perfume, if the wind is
blowing off shore. For there the spices are not cut and old and stored
up, but in fresh vigour and bloom, so that those who sail along the
coast believe that they are enjoying ambrosia, since no other word can
express the extraordinary power and strength of the odour. The monarchy
among the Sabæans is hereditary. Their chief city, Mariaba, lies on a
mountain; here lives the king, who pronounces justice for the people,
but he is never allowed to leave his palace. If he acts otherwise, he is
stoned by the people, in obedience to an ancient oracle. The Sabæans are
the richest people in the world. For a few goods silver and gold are
brought in quantities, and flow in from every side; while, owing to
their remote situation, they have never been conquered by any one.
Hence, especially in the metropolis, they have a number of vessels of
silver and gold and couches, and porticoes, the pillars of which are
gilded in the shaft, and the capitals are adorned with silver ornaments,
while the architraves and doors are finished with gold and precious
stones. On these structures they bestow great care and industry.[438]
Artemidorus of Ephesus, who wrote somewhat later than Agatharchides of
Cnidus, represents the king of the Sabæans and his court as living at
Mariaba, which lay on a wooded mountain, in effeminate luxury. Owing to
the abundance of fruit the people were lazy and inactive, and reclined
on the roots of the spice-trees. For fire-wood they used cinnamon and
cassia. The occupation of the people was partly agriculture, and partly
trade in spices, both native and imported from the opposite coast of
Æthiopia (Africa), whither the Sabæans passed over the inlet of the sea
in boats of skins. The neighbouring tribes received the wares from the
Sabæans, and then passed them on to their neighbours, till they reached
Syria and Mesopotamia.[439] Pliny tells us that the Sabæans were the
most famous of the Arabians, owing to their frankincense, and their land
reached from sea to sea. Their cities lay on the sea and in the
interior, the chief city being Mariaba. One portion of the Sabæans were
called the Chatramites, and their chief city, Sabbatha, had sixty
temples within its walls; further to the east were the Cattabani, whose
city, Thamna, could enumerate sixty-five temples. The Minæans lay in the
interior beyond the Chatramites. The frankincense was collected and
brought to Sabbatha, and could not be purchased and taken away by
strangers till the priests had set apart a tenth for the god of
Sabbatha. The only passage for exportation was through the land of the
Cattabani, to the king of which imposts had to be paid. The priests also
and the scribes of the king received presents, and the doorkeepers,
bodyguard, and escort. Thamna, the chief city of the Cattabani, was
distant seventy-five days' journey from Gaza. And as payments had to be
made, at one place for pasturage, at another for water, at a third for
the stage, and again for the convoy, the cost for each camel as far as
the Syrian desert amounted to 688 denarii.[440]

According to the Hebrew Scriptures the Sheba, _i.e._ the Sabæans, "a
distant people, rich in frankincense, spices, gold, and precious
stones," were to be sought in the south of Arabia.[441] The tribe or
locality of Uzal, which Genesis and Ezekiel mention beside the Sabæans,
is the older name of the later Sanaa. The chief city of the Sabæans,
which Western writers call Mariaba, is the Maryab of the inscriptions.
To the east of the Sabæans, on the south coast, were situated the
Hazarmaweth of the Hebrews, the Chatramites of the Western nations, in
the district of Hadramaut, which still preserves the name. The Rhegmæans
of the Western nations, the sons of Rama among the Hebrews, are to be
sought in the neighbourhood of the Persian Gulf, in Oman, the south-east
of Arabia. Further to the north-east, on the shore of this Gulf, were
the Dedanites; and yet further to the north-east the Havila appear to
have dwelt, who are perhaps the Chaulotæans, whom Eratosthenes places
towards the Lower Euphrates. The Hebrew Scriptures repeatedly mention
the Hagarites, the Nebajoth (the Agræans and Nabatæans of Eratosthenes),
and further towards the interior of Arabia the Kedarites and Temanites;
and lastly, on the peninsula of Sinai, and on the borders of Canaan, the
Amalekites, Edomites, and Midianites. The Hebrews mention two chiefs of
the Midianites, whose names were "Wolf" and "Raven," the leather tents
of this people, the number of their dromedaries, and the moons which
their camels carried as ornaments. Next are mentioned the flocks of the
Nebajoth, the black tents of the Kedarites, their wealth in cattle
(large and small), and their brave bowmen.[442]

The inscriptions of Egypt from the time of the Tuthmosis and the first
Ramses celebrate achievements performed, as it is said, by these
Pharaohs against the Punt, _i.e._ against the Arabs; but with one
exception, they do not supply any information of the land and the tribes
of this people. A daughter of Tuthmosis I., queen Misphra (Hatasu,
Ramake), who was regent first for her brother Tuthmosis II., and during
a considerable time for Tuthmosis III. (1625-1591 B.C.), wished to
become acquainted with "the land of Punt, as far as the uttermost end
of To-Neter." She equipped a fleet on the Red Sea, and led it in person
to the coast of Arabia. The inhabitants of the coast on which she landed
submitted, and she returned to Egypt with rich spoil, in which were
thirty-two spice-trees.[443] The inscriptions of the kings of Asshur
supply further information: among the tribes of the Arabians they
mention in the first place the Pekod, the Hagarites, whom they place in
the neighbourhood of the lands of Hauran, Moab and Zoba, the Kedarites,
Thamudenes, Nabatæans, and finally the Sabæans. The Hebrew Scriptures
bring the queen of Sheba to Solomon at Jerusalem, and represent her as
offering rich presents in gold and frankincense, and similarly
Tiglath-Pilesar II., king of Assyria, tells us that in the year 738 B.C.
he had received tribute from Zabibieh, the queen of Arabia (Aribi), and
in the year 734 B.C. he had taken from Samsieh, queen of the Arabs,
30,000 camels and 20,000 oxen, and further, that he had subjugated the
people of Saba, the city of the Sabæans. Sargon boasts that he had
subdued the people of Thammud (the Thamudenes), Tasid, Ibadid, Marsiman,
Chayapa, the distant Arbæans, and the inhabitants of the land of Bari,
"which was unknown to the learned and to the scribes," and that he
received the tribute of Samsieh, queen of the Arabs, and of Yathamir,
the Sabæan (Sabahi) in gold, spices, and camels (in the year 715 B.C.).
He mentions the land of Agag, "on the borders of the Arabs toward the
rising sun," _i.e._ the Eastern Arabs.[444] King Sennacherib took from
the Pekod, the Hagarites, Nabatæans, and some other tribes, 5,330 camels
and 800,600 head of small cattle (703 B.C.), and in the time of
Assurbanipal (about 645 B.C.) Adiya, the queen of the Arabs, and
Ammuladin, the king of the Kedarites, were brought in chains to Nineveh;
the "innumerable troops" of another prince, Uaiti, were defeated and his
tents burnt. Abiyateh also, who was leagued against Assyria, first with
Uaiti, and then with Nadnu (Nathan), the king of the Nabatæans, was
conquered, together with these allies, and the worshippers of Atar
Samain (Istar). Assurbanipal tells us that out of the booty of this
campaign he distributed camels like sheep, and that at the gate of
Nineveh camels had been sold for half a silver shekel (from 1_s._ 6_d._
to 2_s._).[445]

The position of Arabia, between the valleys of the Nile and the
Euphrates and Tigris, where agriculture and civilisation came into bloom
at an early period, and which were the oldest seats of trade and
industry, brought the Arab tribes who wandered along the borders of
these river valleys into connection with Egypt and Babylon. Barter had
to supply all that could not be obtained by freebooting. The nomads
required corn, implements, and weapons; Egypt and Babylon were in need
of horses, sheep, goats, and camels. The Arabians, therefore, could
exchange their animals for corn, weapons, and implements, and supply the
industry of Babylon and Egypt with a part of the necessary raw products,
more especially skins and wool. The tradition of the Hebrews represents
Abraham as going to Egypt, and the sons of Jacob buy corn in Egypt when
"there was a famine in the land." On the other hand, Egypt, as has been
already remarked, had already, under Snefru, the predecessor of Chufu,
_i.e._ about the year 3000 B.C., fixed herself in the peninsula of
Sinai, and when, a thousand years later, nomad tribes of the north-west
of Arabia obtained the supremacy in the valley of the Nile, and
maintained it for centuries (p. 123), their supremacy could only develop
further the trade between Egypt and the Arabs, between the ruling tribe
in Egypt and their kinsmen at home, and thus the contact with the
civilisation of Egypt and Babylonia was not without effect on the Arabs.
This contact increased their wants, and therefore increased their
trading intercourse. The Arabs could offer not merely the products of
their herds, they could exchange the costly spices and perfumes from the
southern coast of their land with each other, and so convey them to the
Egyptians and Babylonians. The Hebrew Scriptures make Keturah, _i.e._
"Incense," the wife of Abraham, and from this connection spring the
Midianites and the Dedanites; to Esau, the son of Isaac, the progenitor
of the Edomites, they give a wife of the name of Basmath, _i.e._
"Perfume,"[446] and in the twentieth century B.C., according to their
reckoning, we find a caravan of Ishmaelites, with camels, carrying
spices, balsam, and ladanum, and Midianites going for purposes of trade
to Egypt.

The trade of Egypt and Babylonia with the south of Arabia, through the
medium of the Arab tribes, certainly goes back to the year 2000 B.C., if
the attempt was made in Egypt about the year 1600 B.C. to reduce
Southern Arabia. Not long after his campaigns in Syria and Mesopotamia,
Tuthmosis III. imposed on the Syrians a tribute of 828 minæ, and on the
Naharina a tribute of 81 minæ of spices;[447] hence such spices must not
only have found their way into these districts at this time, but must
have been already known as ordinary articles of trade. How strongly
Egypt felt her need of the products of South Arabia is most strikingly
shown by the fact that the Egyptians were very anxious to obtain these
products by the direct route over the Arabian Gulf; the canal which
Ramses II. began to make towards the gulf (p. 146) could have no other
object in view than to facilitate the communication between the Nile and
the coast of South Arabia and East Africa, by the Red Sea. Under Ramses
III. (1269-1244 B.C.) a great fleet is said to have sailed for a second
time to To-Neter, and to have returned to Coptus with the tribute of
these lands and a rich freight.[448] The need of incense was not less in
Babylon than in Egypt. We saw that the preparation of ointments was a
main branch of Babylonian industry, and Herodotus tells us that at the
feast of Belus, at Babylon, a thousand talents of incense, which
according to the light Babylonian weight is more than 60,000 pounds, was
burnt on the altar of the great temple. As the Temanites, Kedarites,
Nebajoth, and Midianites formed the medium of trade between South Arabia
and Egypt, so were the Rhegmæans and Dedanites the communicating link
between South Arabia and Babylonia. Among the Sabæans the Babylonian
talent was current.[449]

This carrying trade between South Arabia, Egypt, Syria, and Mesopotamia
must have increased when the cities of the Phenicians on the Syrian
coast became centres of trade which carried the manufactures of
Babylonia, as well as the products of their own industry, over the sea
to the West, and when the tribes of Greece and Italy began to desire the
incense and spices of Arabia. And it was not only the products of South
Arabia which the Arabs brought to Syria, Egypt, and Babylonia, but also
those of the south coast of Africa, and even of India. Artemidorus told
us that the Sabæans crossed the Arabian Gulf on boats of skins in order
to bring back the products of Ethiopia. Though it was possible to cross
the narrow basin by these means of transit, the mouths of the Indus and
the coasts of Malabar were beyond the reach of such skiffs. If in the
course of time Indian wares reached Syria through the Sabæans, they must
have been brought by the Indians themselves to the coasts of the
Sabæans. At the beginning of the second century B.C. the island
Dioscoridis, off the coast of Somali, which was known to the West as the
Land of Cinnamon, formed the centre of the trade between Egypt, South
Arabia, and India. To this island the ships of the Indians brought the
products of their land.

In the first instance the Arabs transported the goods from South Arabia
to the Euphrates and the Nile on their camels, and afterwards it lay
with them to permit or refuse a passage for the caravans of the
Babylonians and Phenicians. First one tribe and then another lay in wait
for the caravans, plundered them, or allowed them to buy a passage,
convoy, or guide.[450] Eratosthenes has already told us that the
merchants took seventy days in going from the Minæans to Aela, _i.e._ to
Elath, on the north-east point of the Arabian Gulf, and Pliny fixes the
distance from Gaza to Thamna, the chief city of the Cattabani, at
seventy-five days' journey. Of the caravan road which led from the
Sabæans, _i.e._ in all probability from Maryab to Elath, we only know
that it ran along the coast, then passed from Elath by Sela and Bosra
into the mountains of the Edomites, then divided the land of the
Moabites and Ammonites, passed by Kir Moab (Charak Moab) and Rabbat
Ammon, Edrei and Ashtaroth Karnaim, through the land of the Jeturites,
to Damascus, and finally, from this place reached the cities of the
Phenicians. A second road led apparently past the Oasis of Duma (Dumætha
of Ptolemy, Dumat-el-Dshandal) straight to Damascus. In the east the
Dedanites brought the products of South Arabia through the desert, by
the land of the Temanites and Kedarites, to the Lower Euphrates.[451]
The goods not required for Babylonia then passed up the Euphrates to
Harran (Charræ). From this point the caravans turned to the west, and in
twenty days arrived through the desert at the coasts of the
Phenicians.[452]

How active the trade with the land of frankincense was is shown by the
words of the Hebrew prophet, who proclaims to the new Jerusalem: "A
multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and
Ephah (see below); all they from Shebah shall come; they shall bring
gold and incense. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together
unto thee; the rams of Nebajoth shall minister unto thee."[453] The
Arabs, when conquered by the Persians, were compelled to pay a yearly
tribute of 1,000 talents of incense,[454] _i.e._ at least 60,000 pounds.
This they could only obtain from South Arabia, and to Western nations
the connection between Damascus and South Arabia appeared so close, that
they represented the Sabæans as colonists of the Egyptians, Ninus and
Semiramis having sent colonies from Damascus to Arabia Felix.

Though the Phenicians could receive the products of South Arabia and the
Somali coast by the high road of Elath, and from the Euphrates by
Harran, they were nevertheless eager to have a connection by sea with
these regions. They availed themselves of the relations in which they
stood to Solomon, king of Israel, in order to send ships from Eziongeber
down the Arabian Gulf, to Ophir, as far as the mouth of the Indus. These
ships brought back sandalwood, apes, peacocks, and gold. This trade fell
with the decline of the kingdom of Judah, after the time of Jehoshaphat.
But when Amaziah of Judah again subjugated the Edomites, about the year
790 B.C., and after him his son Uzziah again advanced the borders of
Judah to the Red Sea, the Phenicians also resumed their connection with
the kings of Judah and the trade to Ophir.[455] Afterwards Pharaoh Necho
gave them an opportunity for a short time to set out upon their voyages
in the Arabian Gulf, not, indeed, from the north-east, but from the
north-west corner of the Red Sea. But immediately afterwards
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, by subduing the Dedanites and planting
Babylonian centres of trade on the coast of Dedan and at the mouth of
the Euphrates, succeeded in transplanting the marine trade with South
Arabia to the Persian Gulf, while the conquest of the Kedarites also put
him in a position to strike a road across the desert from Babylon to
Sela (in the land of the Edomites, see below). Darius or the Ptolemies
were the first to succeed in the attempt made by Rameses II. and Necho,
and concentrated in the Bay of Heroonpolis the trade of Egypt and Syria
with South Arabia.

Soon after the year 2000 B.C.--so we must conclude--the tribes of South
Arabia delivered their spices to the Egyptians, Syrians, and
Babylonians, and their incense, which Eastern nations, and in time
Western nations also, burned upon the altars of their gods. Then they
imported the products of the opposite shore of Africa, a region no less
fruitful than South Arabia, and at length the ships of the Indians
brought to them the products of the Indus and the Ganges. Thus South
Arabia not only exported her own fruits, she became the central mart of
East African and Indian products, the point of connection between
Eastern and Western Asia. Owing to the fertility of their valleys and
terraces, and their old and extensive trade, the tribes of the South
soon acquired a more fixed form of constitution and a more advanced
civilisation. Numerous remains of magnificent stone structures, ruins of
aqueducts, canals, basins, and dams, built with the object of preserving
and collecting the water which streamed down the terraces of the
mountains and in the valleys, still excite the astonishment of our
travellers for the excellence of the plan as well as for the strength of
the masonry. The ruins of Nedshran, Sirwah, Ghorab, Nakb-el-Hadshar, and
Misenat, and those of Maryab, the old metropolis of the Sabæans, confirm
what Western writers and Arab tradition tell us of the glorious palaces
of the ancient time and the mighty dams built in the valley of
Maryab.[456] The remains of the dams prove that South Arabia, like Egypt
and Babylonia, was far better cultivated in those distant times than
now; that there also the greatest importance was attached to irrigation,
and the inhabitants understood how to preserve and use the water from
the mountain-streams on the terraces. The natural assumption that at one
time the cultivation of valuable fruits was far more extensive in South
Arabia than at present can hardly be incorrect. The inscriptions found
in those ruins and elsewhere in the south-west of Yemen, though they do
not, so far as is at present ascertained, go back beyond the year 120
B.C.,[457] give us some insight into the nature of the civilisation of
these tribes and the ancient form of the South Arabian language and
alphabet, which must have grown out of the Phenician at an early date,
and then have developed independently beside it.[458] Of a still more
recent date, from the first century A.D., we find in the opposite
north-west corner of Arabia numerous inscriptions on the rocks in the
region of Sinai, written in the North Arabian language and
alphabet.[459]

The Hebrew Scriptures divide the tribes of the Arabs into four
groups--the Joktanites, among whom tribes of the south and east take the
lead; the Keturites, among whom are tribes of Western and Eastern
Arabia; the Ishmaelites, including tribes of the table-land of the
interior and North Arabia; and finally, the group of tribes who settled
and wandered on the eastern borders of Canaan--the Amalekites, Moabites,
Ammonites, and Edomites. The Hebrews derive the origin of the Arabs from
the progenitors from whom they were themselves sprung. To Shem, the son
of Noha, so Genesis tells us, Arphaxad was born, and "Arphaxad begat
Salah, and Salah begat Eber, and Eber begat Peleg and Joktan. And Joktan
begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth (the Chatramites, in
Hadramaut, p. 314), and Jerah, and Hadoram, and Uzal (Sanaa), and
Diklah, and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba (the Sabæans), and Ophir and
Havilah (the Chaulotæans), and Jobab (the Jobarites of Ptolemy, on the
south coast), and their dwelling was from Mesha (Maishan, Mesene on the
Euphrates) towards Sephar (Dshafar, to the south of Sanaa and Maryab), a
mount of the East." Peleg, the elder brother of Joktan, was the father
of Reu, Reu, of Serug; then followed Nahor and Terah. Terah's sons were
Abraham, Nahor, and Haran. To Abraham Hagar, his Egyptian bond-servant,
bore Ishmael. Abraham sent Hagar and Ishmael into the deserts of
Beersheba, but "God was with the lad, and he grew and dwelt in the
wilderness of Paran, and was an archer, and his mother took him a wife
from the land of Egypt, and his first-born was Nebajoth (the Nabatæans,
p. 314), and his sons were Kedar (the Kedarites) and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
and Mishma, and Dumah (p. 320), and Massa (the Masanians of Ptolemy),
and Hadar, and Thema (the Themanites, p. 314), and Jetur (the Jeturites,
near Damascus, p. 320), and Naphish, and Kedemiah, twelve princes; and
the descendants of Ishmael dwelt from Shur, which is before Egypt, and
from Havilah (p. 314) to Asshur." "And again Abraham took a wife, whose
name was Keturah, and she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and
Midian (the Midianites) and Ishbak, and Shuah. And Joksham begat Dedan,
and the sons of Midian were Ephah and Epher (p. 320). And Abraham gave
them gifts and sent them away into the east country."[460] Abraham's son
was Isaac, Isaac's oldest son was Esau, the father of the Edomites, and
Esau's grandson, Amalek, was the progenitor of the Amalekites.[461]
Haran, the brother of Abraham, begat Lot, and Lot's sons were Moab and
Ammon (the Moabites and Ammonites). From these genealogies it is clear
that the Hebrews looked on the Arabs almost without exception as kinsmen
of their own,[462] and as kinsmen of a more ancient branch, for the
Hebrews were descended from the second son of Isaac. The place nearest
to themselves they give to the Ishmaelites, who were divided into twelve
tribes, the descendants of the twelve princes, the sons of Ishmael--and
next in order came the Edomites, Ammonites, and Moabites.

The native tradition of the Arabs is without historical value. Their
recollections hardly go back as far as the beginning of the Christian
era, and all that their historians who began to write after Mohammed
knew of the older fortunes of their race is either borrowed from the
Hebrews or mere imagination. The Amalekites, whom they found in the
Hebrew Scriptures, they took for their original stock, and represented
them as dwelling in Canaan and Damascus, as well as in the land of Mecca
and Oman, and even as ruling over Egypt. These Amalekites--the Tasmites
and Dshadi, the A'adites and Dshorhomites--they consider as the genuine
Arabs; to whom God had taught Arabic after the confusion of speech. But
the Tasmites and Dshadi are as little historic as Amalek in the Arabian
tradition; their names signify "the extinct" and "the lost;" the
A'adites are a purely fabulous nation, and the Dshorhomites (near Mecca)
are a tribe of no great antiquity.[463] The progenitor of the southern
tribes of Yemen is, in the Arabian tradition, Kachtan, the son of Eber,
and great-grandson of Noah. This is the Joktan of Genesis. Kachtan's
son, J'arab, founded the monarchy of the Kachtanids, in South Arabia;
Abd-Shams-Sabah, the grandson of J'arab, built the city of Mareb, the
chief city of the Sabæans, according to the Greeks. This founder of the
monarchy of the Sabæans left two sons, Himyar and Kachlan. The first was
the progenitor of the Himyarites, who are mentioned even by Western
writers, but not till the first century A.D., and then on the south
coast between Mareb and Hadramaut. The name Himyarites includes the
tribes of the Chatramites, the Codaa, the Kinana, the Dshoheina, &c.
Kachlan founded Dshafar (p. 324), and was the progenitor of the
Kachlanids, _i.e._ the Hamdanids, the Badshila, the Odthan, the Chozaa,
and other tribes. To the kingdom of Mareb, founded by Abd-Shams-Sabah,
the Arab tradition ascribes a long list of princes. But even if we
ascribe a period of more than thirty years to every name in this series,
the date of Kachtan is not carried back beyond 700 B.C.[464]
Abd-Shams-Sabah is said to have built not only Mareb, but also a great
dam for the irrigation of the country. The excellent dams, canals, and
sluices at Sanaa (the Uzal of the Hebrews, westward of Mareb) are said
to have been built by Asad.[465] The castles of Sahlin and Bainun (at
Sanaa) are said to have been built by demons at the bidding of Solomon
for Belkis, queen of Shebah. Besides these the Arabs talk of numerous
castles and fortresses in the south. Towards the year 100 B.C. Harith, a
descendant of Himyar, obtained the throne of the Sabæans; and the place
of the Sabæans is taken by the Himyarites, the Homerites of Western
nations, who henceforth are the ruling nation in Yemen, a change for
which Arab tradition prepares the way by making Himyar the son and
successor of Abd-Shams-Sabah. Harith's successors fixed their residence
first at Dshafar (Dhu Raidan), then at Mareb, and finally at Sanaa.[466]

The tribes of the high land of the interior, whom the Arabs call Neshd,
_i.e._ "the high people," and certain tribes of Hidyaz, are derived by
tradition from Adnan, a grandson of Ishmael. When Ibrahim (Abraham) had
sent away Hagar and her son, and Hagar was about to perish in the
desert, the child Ishmael struck the earth with his foot, and from it
sprang the fountain of Zamzam, close to Mecca. Amalekites, in search of
their lost camels, found the spring, settled down beside it, and
worshipped Ishmael as the lord of the spring. Then came tribes from the
South, the Dshorhomites and Katura, to the fountain; and Ishmael married
the daughter of the chief of the Dshorhomites and begot Nabit (the
Nebajoth) and Kaidar (the Kedarites). The Amalekites and Katura were
then driven away, and the Dshorhomites remained alone in possession of
the fountain of Zamzam. Kaidar's son was Adnan. From Adnan sprang the
Benu Bekr, the Taghlib, the Temim, the Takif, the Gatafan, &c. If we
ascend the genealogies which Arab tradition gives to the princes of the
tribes sprung from Ishmael, in twenty generations, ending with Adnan,
the grandson of Ishmael, we only arrive at the end of the second
century B.C., even if we allow thirty years for each generation.[467]

The few facts which we can make out about the religious worship of the
southern Arabs (they belong almost exclusively to the period in which
the Himyarites obtained the supremacy in South Arabia) exhibit a certain
connection with the worship of the Babylonians; but we cannot ascertain
whether this coincidence, like the close relationship of the South
Arabian and Babylonian languages (p. 256), is due to original unity or
later intercourse. The Byzantines tell us that the Himyarites worshipped
the sun, the moon, and certain demons of the land. The tradition of the
Arabs mentions Abd-Shams-Sabah as the founder of the kingdom of the
Sabæans, and the name Abd-Shams signifies the servant of the sun-god,
and hence in the eyes of the Arabs the worship of the sun-god must have
occupied a very prominent place in the religion of the Sabæans--a fact
which is confirmed by the inscriptions. They mention the sun-god (Shams,
Shamas), the moon-god Al-makak, and the gods Aththor, Haubas, and Dhu
Samavi.[468] The Himyarites are said to have worshipped the sun under
the form of an eagle (Nasr), and the Hamdanids (who dwelt to the north
of Sanaa and Mareb) under the form of a horse; a third tribe in Yemen
are said to have worshipped him in the form of a lion.[469]

The accounts which we have of the religion of the tribes who in the
second century of our era, in consequence of the bursting of a great dam
at Mareb, according to Arab tradition, migrated to the North, and by
this migration destroyed or drove out or amalgamated with the new-comers
a considerable number of the old tribes of this region, prove that the
immigrants worshipped certain stars as their protecting deities. The
Tadshi immigrants from the South, who pastured their flocks on the oasis
of Duma (p. 320), worshipped Canopus; the Lachmites, who were driven
towards Hira, on the lower Euphrates, worshipped the fortunate star
Jupiter; and the Chozaa, who settled to the north of Mecca, worshipped
Sirius.[470]

With regard to the religious rites of the tribes derived by the Arabs
from Adnan, we learn that the Benu Bekr, who forced their way from Neshd
towards the Euphrates, worshipped the god Audh, _i.e._ the burning one;
an ancient form of oath used by this tribe runs as follows--"I swear by
the blood streams round Audh and the stones set up beside Suair." The
Kinana and the Benu Gatafan in Hidyaz worshipped the goddess Uzza, a
name which is said to signify "the mighty one" in a sacred tree.[471]
The tribe of the Takif (near Taif, southward of Mecca) worshipped the
goddess Allat, in whose name we can, without difficulty, recognise the
Alilat of Herodotus: Alilahat means "the goddess." Among the palms of
the valley of Nachlah rose the mighty tree of the goddess, "presented
with sacred offerings;" but the Takif also prayed to this goddess under
the form of a white stone. A third goddess, of the name of Manat, held
sway in the district of Medinah; she was worshipped in a black
shapeless stone. The Kuraish swore by Allat, Uzza, and Manat.[472] Among
other tribes of the desert the goddess Halasah, or Venus, was
worshipped. According to the Western writers the Nabatæans are said to
have worshipped the sun and the war-god Dusares.[473] "His image is a
black, undressed, rectangular stone, four feet high and two feet broad,
on a pedestal of beaten gold. To this stone they offer sacrifice and
pour libations with the blood of the victims; such are their libations;
the whole temple is filled with gold and votive offerings." Modern
scholars identify this god Dusares with the Du'sharah of Arabian
writers.[474] Herodotus has already told us that on the conclusion of
agreements the stones between the two parties were smeared with blood;
and, as according to this evidence, the idols also were sprinkled with
the blood of the victims, we can explain the oath of Benu Bekr by the
bloodstreams round Audh. The statement of Herodotus that the Arabs
worshipped Urotal and Alilat only, and the statements of Strabo and
Arrian that they worshipped Zeus, and Dionysus, and the sky, must
apparently be limited to the migratory tribes of the north.

Of the gods worshipped by the tribes bordering on Syria we have more
definite knowledge. The Midianites and Amalekites who possessed the
sandstone plateau of Sinai, and the deserts of Shur in the north, and
Sin in the south, worshipped on the highest peaks of that district
which the Hebrews called Horeb and Sinai (_i.e._ the Sinian), the god
Baal, who was also worshipped by the Syrians. At the foot of Sinai there
still remains the well-watered palm grove, with its rich black earth, of
which Agatharchides and Diodorus told us above (p. 309). It is the oasis
of Firan, and from the palms the mountain above it is still called
Serbal, _i.e._ "the palm forest of Baal."[475] The Moabites invoked Baal
on Mount Peor, and in times of distress appeased his wrath by human
sacrifices. In the same way the Ammonites worshipped their god Milkom;
the female deity of the Moabites was Astor, the Astarte of the Syrians,
who was also worshipped by the Kedarites.[476] That the Baal of Sinai
was a god who gave fruits and water in the desert is clear from the fact
that Herodotus could compare the god of the Arabs with Dionysus, and
Strabo and Arrian could ascribe the worship of Dionysus to the Arabs.

From a general view of these scanty notices it becomes clear that the
basis of the religious conceptions current among the Semitic tribes of
Arabia was not widely different from that of the Semitic tribes by the
Euphrates and Tigris, or in Syria, which will be found to be connected
with each other. It is easy to understand that the rites of the tribes
bordering on Syria were nearer to the rites of the Syrians, and it has
been already remarked that the worship of the southern tribes appears to
be most closely allied to the rites of the Babylonians. Here, as there,
we find the worship of Astarte; Herodotus expressly calls the goddess
of the Arabs by the name of Mylitta, the Bilit of the Babylonians, whom,
as we shall see, the Canaanites also worshipped with much zeal. We saw
that in Babylon her power was recognized in the evening gleam of the
planet Venus, that all young things, fountains, and pools, belonged to
this goddess; and we shall find her worshipped in Syria on the shady
heights of Lebanon. The tribes of the Arabian deserts also consecrated
lofty trees to this goddess, their Allat, or Halasah; and just as they
believed that the power of this, as of other deities, was present in
stones, so shall we find a similar custom prevailing among the Syrians.
That the tribes of the deserts should pay especial reverence to the
deities of the stars--we have seen how systematised was the worship of
stars in Babylon--cannot surprise us. With the refreshing dew of evening
not Venus only or the moon, but the whole glory of the starry heaven met
the eye and touched the spirit of the Arabs. High above the tents and
resting flocks, above the nocturnal ride and waiting ambuscade, and all
the doings of men the stars passed along on their glittering courses.
They guided the Arabs on their way through the deserts; certain
constellations announced the wished-for rain, others the wild storms,
the changes of the seasons, the time for breeding in their herds and
flocks. As these stars at one time brought abundance and good pastures
for their flocks, and at another dried up the springs and scorched the
meadows, so could they also bring joy and happiness or trouble and pain
to men. Hence to the tribes of the desert especially brilliant stars
appeared as living spirits, as rulers over nature and the fortunes of
mankind.

The life of the roving tribes in the interior whom the Arabs denote by
the general name of Badawi (Bedouins), _i.e._ "sons of the desert," has
undergone few changes; at the present day but slight deviations have
been made from the customs and conditions of the ancient time. Their
life was regulated according to their descent in patriarchal forms, and
the basis of it was the natural affection of the family. At the head of
the tribe stood the chief of the oldest family, from which the rest
derived their origin. All descendants of the patriarch who had given the
name to the tribe gave a willing obedience to his nearest descendants,
for the claims of primogeniture were sacred. The wealth in horses of
excellent breed, camels, and cattle is the pride of these tribal chiefs
and the symbol of their supremacy. Surrounded by the council of the
elders, the heads of the other families, the chiefs maintained peace in
the tribe, settled quarrels, led out the youth of the tribe on
plundering expeditions and in feuds, and divided the spoil. They alone
had the right to assemble the tribe, to carry the standards under which
the tribe fought, and give the command in battle. In rare instances the
remembrance of a common origin keeps several tribes together in a kind
of union under the chief of the oldest tribe, from which the others have
branched off, but as a rule the tribes hold proudly aloof and are
hostile to each other. They attack each other, plunder the tents, carry
off the women, children, and servants, and drive away the flocks. When a
feud has once broken out and members of a tribe have been slain, it is
incumbent on the family and tribe to which the dead belonged to revenge
the fallen, and kill at least as many members of the hostile tribe.
This duty of revenge is hereditary on either side, and descends from
generation to generation until the chief of a third tribe is chosen to
decide the quarrel and become a peace-maker by fixing a fine of cattle
or other property.

In such a mode of life, which, in its general features, has remained
unchanged for thousands of years, the Arabs of the desert exercised the
virtues of reverence, piety, and attachment to their tribal chiefs; thus
there grew up among them a steadfast, manly character; they were true to
their promise when once given, and displayed a noble hospitality. If any
one came in peace to their tents, drink was given to him by the
daughters of the tribe from the fountains, the men took him as a friend
into their tents and shared their store of dates with him, or
entertained him with a sheep from the flock. When the stranger had once
set his foot in the tent, the host guaranteed his safety with his own
life. When the night came on with her refreshing coolness, the stranger
was required to sit in the starlight in the circle of the tribesmen. He
was expected to tell of his origin, his race, and tribe; and then the
hosts also told the fame of their ancestors and sang the deeds of their
fathers and themselves, the feuds and encounters in which their tribe
had been victorious, the virtues of their favourite horses, and the
swiftness of their camels.

Poetry was the only form of intellectual life known to the tribes of the
desert. The Bedouins had a lively sense of the incidents which broke the
simple loneliness of their lives, and gave them a vigorous and even a
fiery expression. The artless song was the expression of feelings deeply
stirred by sorrow or joy. Such songs were equally adapted for calling
to mind their own deeds and fortunes or those of the tribe, and for
moral exhortation. They were "occasional" pieces. Lament for the dead,
praise of the noblest warrior, the battles and exaltation of the tribe,
the generosity and courage of their own tribe or hatred of the hostile
tribe, derision of the enemy, hunting, weapons, rides through the
desert, horses and camels, are the subjects of this poetry, which is
expressed in short iambic verses. Tradition mentions Lokman as the
oldest poet. He is supposed to be a contemporary of David; and round his
name is gathered a number of proverbs, gnomes, and fables. The short
poems lived on in the tribe, they were sung again and again, extended
and recast. At a later time there were also rhapsodes who could repeat a
store of such poems.

The Arabs have developed in the most healthy and marked manner the
characteristic features of the Semitic race. Their roving life in the
deserts under the burning sun and amid tempests and whirlwinds of sand
has strengthened and hardened them. Surrounded in pathless isolation by
beasts of prey and hostile tribes, every one was dependent on his own
watchfulness and keenness, on his courage and resolution, on his horse
and his lance. On a frugal and scanty sustenance the body became lean
and thin, but supple, muscular, and capable of endurance; and in these
hardy bodies dwelt a resolute spirit. Thus the Arabs display a freer
attitude, a more steadfast repose, a more haughty pride, a greater love
of independence, and a more adventurous boldness than their kinsmen.
Their land and their mode of life have saved them from the greedy
avarice, from the luxury and debauchery, into which the Semitic nations
on the Euphrates and Tigris, as on the Mediterranean, often fell,
though they share in the cruelty and bloodthirstiness common to their
race. It was the Arabs on whose virgin strength a new Semitic empire and
civilization was able to be founded in the Middle Ages, when Babel and
Asshur, Tyre and Carthage, Jerusalem and Palmyra had long passed away.

FOOTNOTES:

[428] Herod. 3, 7; 1, 131; 7, 69, 86.

[429] Eratosthenes in Strabo, p. 767.

[430] Strabo, p. 777.

[431] Diod. 2, 48; 3, 44.

[432] Diod. 2, 48, 50, 54; 3, 42, 43. The accounts of the grove are
taken from Agatharchides.--Strabo, p. 777.

[433] "Hist. Nat." 6, 32.

[434] Amm. Marcell. 14, 4.

[435] Herod. 3, 107-113.

[436] Heracl. Cuman. Fragm. 4. ed. Müller.

[437] Apud Strabon. p. 768 ff.

[438] Agatharch. "De Mari Erythr.;" apud Diod. 3, 45-48, and the excerpt
of Photius in Müller, "Geogr. Gr. Min." 1, 111 ff.; cf. Strabo, p. 778.

[439] Strabo, p. 778.

[440] "Hist. Nat." 12, 32; 6, 32 seq.

[441] The queen of Sheba, who brings such large gifts of gold and spices
to Solomon, must in any case be regarded as the queen of the rich spice
land, and with this account agree other passages in which Sheba is
mentioned. To the Seba, who are mentioned in Psalm lxxii. 10, 15, as
rich in gold along with the Sheba, and are described in Isaiah as people
of great stature (xlv. 15; cf. xliii. 3), and are placed in Genesis x. 7
among the children of Cush, I cannot assign any place. Prideaux assumes
that the two nations became amalgamated; "Trans. Bibl. Arch." 2, 2.

[442] Isaiah xxi. 13, 14, 17.

[443] Dümichen, "Die Flotte einer ægyptischen Königin."

[444] G. Smith, "Assyr. Discov." p. 286; Schrader, "Keilschriften und
Alt. Test." s. 56, 143, 163.

[445] G. Smith, "Assurbanipal," pp. 264, 265, 275.

[446] Gen. xxv. 1-11; xxvi. 34; xxxvi. 11.

[447] Birch, "The Annals of Tutmes III.;" "Archæolog." vol. xlv.

[448] Papyrus Harris in Chabas, "Recherches sur la Dynastie 19," p. 59.

[449] Movers, "Phoenizier," 2, 3, 302.

[450] Strabo, p. 756; Pliny, "Hist. Nat." 12, 32.

[451] Isaiah xxi. 13, 14.

[452] Movers, "Phoenizier," 2, 3, 293.

[453] Isaiah lx. 6.

[454] Herod. 3, 97.

[455] 1 Kings xxii. 49; 2, xiv. 7, 22; 2 Chronicles xvii.; 2, xxvi. 6,
7. Under Ahaz, the grandson of Uzziah, Elath was again lost.--2 Kings
xvi. 6.

[456] Caussin de Percival, "Histoire des Arabes," 1, 16, 17; Wellsted,
"Reisen in Arabien, von E. Rödiger," 1, 307.

[457] Prideaux, "Trans. Bibl. Arch." 2, 19.

[458] D. H. Müller, "Zeit. d. d. M. Gesellschaft," 1876, s. 522 ff.

[459] Osiander in the "Zeit. d. d. M. Gesellschaft," 10, 17-73;
Praetorius, _loc. cit._ 26, 417 ff; Gildemeister and Levy, _loc. cit._
24, 188.

[460] Genesis xxv. 1-6.

[461] Genesis xxxvi. 12-16.

[462] The table in Genesis x. 7, places Ramah, Shebah, Dedan, Havilah,
among the sons of Cush, but in the genealogy of the Arabs (c. xxv.)
Shebah and Dedan are given to Joktan and Midian.

[463] Nöldeke. "Ueber die Amalekiter," s. 23 ff.

[464] Caussin, "Histoire des Arabes," 1, 49, arrives at the year 794 for
the birth of J'arab, by allotting thirty-three years to each generation.
Wüstenfeld, in his genealogical tables, gives from thirty to thirty-four
generations between Kachtan and Mohammed, and thus, though he allows
forty years for each generation, cannot reach beyond the year 700 B.C.
for Kachtan.

[465] Osiander, in "Zeitschr. d. d. Morgen. Gesellschaft," 10, 27.

[466] Caussin, "Histoire des Arabes," 1, 49-60; Prideaux, "Trans. Bibl.
Arch." 2, 10.

[467] Caussin, "Hist. des Arabes," 1, 166 ff. Wüstenfeld ("Genealogische
Tabellen") reaches higher, because, as already remarked, he allows forty
years for a generation.

[468] Krehl, "Religion der Araber," s. 41, 30; Lenormant, "Lett. Assyr."
2, 10.

[469] Osiander, "Zeitschr. d. d. M. G." 7, 474; 10, 63; 11, 472;
Lenormant, _loc. cit._ 279; Caussin, _loc. cit._ 1, 113; Prideaux,
"Trans. Bibl. Arch." 2, 18.

[470] Krehl, "Religion der Araber," 8, 24; Osiander, "Zeitschr. d. d. M.
G." 7, 473 ff.

[471] Osiander, _loc. cit._ 7, 487. On a stone image we find a cow and a
calf with the inscription "Uzza."

[472] Krehl, "Religion der Araber," s. 73, 78. On the seven black stones
of the planets at Erech.--"W. A. J." 2, 50. On the stones of the Kaabah,
Lenormant, "Lettres Assyr." 2, 120 ff.; Caussin, "Hist. des Arabes," 1,
165, 176 ff.

[473] Strabo, p. 784; Suid. [Greek: Theos Arês]; Steph. Byz. [Greek:
Dousarê].

[474] Krehl, _loc. cit._ s. 49. See _ibid._ on the worship of Alful,
Sahd, and Sahid.

[475] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 330 ff.

[476] Nöldeke, "Inschrift. des Mesa," s. 6. The amalgamation of Astarte
with Camus, like the amalgamation with Melkarth among the Phenicians
presupposes the separate worship of the goddess.--G. Smith,
"Assurbanipal," p. 283.




CHAPTER V.

THE CANAANITES.


Between the basin of the Euphrates and Tigris and the Mediterranean rise
the mountains of Syria, an elevated plateau which ascends gradually from
the right bank of the Euphrates and descends steeply on the sea-coast. A
peculiar depression, known as Hollow Syria,[477] divides this region in
its entire length from north to south--from the Taurus to the N.E. point
of the Red Sea, and separates the plateau into an eastern and a western
half. The bed of the narrow valley reaches its greatest elevation in the
neighbourhood of the city of Baalbec (Heliopolis). From this point the
Orontes flows towards the north and irrigates the green gardens of Emesa
and Hamath, till it turns westward and finds a way toward the sea at
Antioch; the Leontes and the Jordan flow towards the south. Between
steep walls of rock the Jordan hurries down the gorge, and passes in a
rapid course through the lakes of Merom and Kinneroth (Gennesareth),
which are formed by the streams from the mountains on either side. The
deeper the bed of the valley the more valuable are the fruits growing in
the tropic atmosphere. The country round Jericho, the city of palms,
sheltered from the winds of the table-land and heated by the rays
refracted from the walls of rock, produces grapes and figs for ten
months in the year; its wealth in dates and balsam was rated high in
antiquity.[478] The course of the Jordan ends in the Dead Sea, the
surface of which is about 1,300 feet below the level of the
Mediterranean.

Out of Hollow Syria rises on the east like a wall of rock the plateau of
Aram,[479] in naked, wild, and broken ridges, which, in Antilibanus, the
highest point, reaches 9,000 feet. On the back of the mountains we find
at first green pastures overshadowed by forests of oak, but further
towards the east the heights become bald and desolate, until the land,
as it sinks towards the Euphrates, gradually assumes the character of
the deserts, which are broken only by the fruitful depressions of
Damascus, Hieropolis (Membidsh), and Tadmor (Palmyra).

On the west of the fissure the land is differently shaped. The coast is
a narrow strip of land, which only extends into small plains at the
mouths of the mountain streams; it is hot, moist, and unhealthy, but of
great fertility. Soon the white and yellow limestone rocks of the
mountains begin to rise. On these heights the air is purer and cooler,
and terraces planted with myrtles and oleanders, with pines, fig-trees,
and mulberries, alternate with vineyards. On the broad slopes of the
loftier mountain ridges rise splendid forests of tamarisks, planes,
cypresses and nut-trees, and above all magnificent cedars. Even now some
trees are found here forty feet in girth and ninety feet in height.[480]
Just in front of the highest ridges of rock lie green slopes, on which
feed numerous flocks of black goats, disturbed by jackals, bears, and
lions, dwelling in the desolate gorges. Between the mouth of the Orontes
and the promontory of Carmel, which runs out far into the sea, this
mountain wall, which stretches out to the sea, reaches its greatest
height in the peaks of Libanus (over 10,000 feet) of which Tacitus
remarks with astonishment that they retained the snow even in that hot
climate.[481] Rising above the green pastures and forests, the
cultivated and watered fields, this ridge with its white mantle of snow
gives the appearance of a winter landscape above perpetual spring.
Southward of Carmel the mountains become lower, and at the same time
less precipitous and picturesque. The coast is broader and more sandy,
flatter, and with fewer harbours. In the place of the steep ridges is a
grassy depression (Esdraelon, Galilee), overtopped by one or two peaks
only, like Tabor (1,700 feet). Then parallel ridges again form valleys,
broad and fruitful and overshadowed by forests (Samaria), until the land
between the Dead Sea and the coast assumes a severer and wilder
character. There the table-land is rough and bare, the valleys are
narrow and deep clefts, the soil is stony. From Libanus the eye looks
out on the most various groups of wooded promontories and a smiling
coast, but in Judæa the landscape exhibits none but severe and simple
outlines. On the wide expanses only a few bushes of pale olives arise,
or transparent groups of a few palm-trees. The grassy plains have made
way for steppes or downs, and even the bed of the valleys is covered
with fresh green only in the brief rainy season. The region round the
Dead Sea is wholly desolate. Springs of sulphur and beds of bitumen
point to a volcanic origin; the large proportion of salt contained in
the water makes it impossible for fish to live in the lake, and the
deposits of salt which cover the country round restrict the vegetation.

In contrast to the vast and uniform regions of the Tigris and Euphrates
and Arabia, the western mountains of Syria exhibit change and variety.
The narrowness of the coast forces the inhabitants upon the sea, the
luxuriant fertility of the deeper valleys invites to cultivation of the
land and the planting of vines and orchards, while the upland valleys
and mountain slopes permit nothing but pastoral life, combined with a
little agriculture. There is no central district from which these
numerous and for the most part secluded mountain cantons can be brought
into unity and governed. In the place of the uniform development of
large masses of people we have here to expect a variety of modes of
culture; in the place of one huge despotic kingdom, and the uniform
movement of wandering tribes a more independent and unfettered
development of small communities; sharp contrasts appear in the place of
a general civilisation. At the same time these Syrian coasts by the sea
and mountain air, by life on the ocean and among the hills, compensate
to a great degree the enervating influences of the Eastern sun, and thus
the elements are combined which are wont to keep fresh and vigorous the
life and power of the inhabitants. As the sea attracted the inhabitants
to distant regions, and trained upon its waves a mobile, enterprising,
active population, so on the other hand did the severe formation of the
hills and the seclusion of the valleys lead to a uniform unchanging mode
of life and a desire to retain what was customary and traditional. The
nearer these opposites approached each other the more energetic must
have been their mutual operation, the more lively the process of
intellectual life, and the more productive its results.

The mountain district extending on the west of the fissure from Mount
Hermon and the sources of the Orontes southward as far as the desert
which divides Syria from Egypt was by its inhabitants called Canaan. We
met with this name already in the inscriptions of Sethos I. It means
lower land, and has obviously been transferred from the coast to the
interior. Among the Greeks the southern strip of coast was named
Palæstina, after the Philistines (the Pelishtim) who possessed it; the
northern part, from Carmel to the Eleutherus (Nahr-el-Kebir) was
Phenicia; among the Egyptians the coast was known as Kaft; the tribes of
the interior, and more especially those of Northern Syria, were known as
Retennu.[482]

The oldest information about these districts which has come down to us
is contained in the statements about the campaigns which Kudur-Lagamer
and Kudur-Mabuk of Elam are said to have undertaken against Syria (p.
251). If we might regard the kings of Elam, who extended their power
over Babylonia, and then forced their way to Syria, as belonging to the
fourth dynasty of Berosus, the campaign of Kudur-Lagamer and Kudur-Mabuk
could be placed about the year 2000 B.C. When Babylonia under Sarrukin
and Hammurabi shook off the supremacy of Elam, Sarrukin is said to have
advanced towards Syria as far as the "Western Sea" (p. 260). Three
centuries later Syria was attacked from the western or opposite side. As
soon as the kings of Upper Egypt had succeeded in expelling the Hyksos
from the land, they carried their arms towards Syria, and in these
campaigns repeatedly touched the Euphrates. In the times of Tuthmosis I.
(1646-1625 B.C.) we are told that he traversed Syria towards the north,
advanced as far as the Euphrates, and set up a column there. Tuthmosis
III. (1591-1565 B.C.) marched seven times against Syria; in the fourth
campaign (1580 B.C.) he reached and crossed the Euphrates; then he
appears to have advanced through Mesopotamia as far as the Tigris, and
to have collected tribute there.[483] More than one hundred and fifty
years later Sethos I. (1439-1388 B.C.) fought against the Schasu, _i.e._
the Shepherds, "who extend as far as Canana," the Cheta (Hittites), and
the Retennu, _i.e._ the Syrians. Ramses II. (1388-1322 B.C.) invaded the
land of Kaft, and caused memorials of his victories to be engraved upon
the rocks at Nahr-el-Kelb, in the neighbourhood of Berytus, fought
against the Hittites and their allies from the Euphrates, the prince of
Karchemish, and then concluded peace and entered into friendship with
the prince of the Cheta (p. 150 ff). The campaigns of Ramses III.
(1269-1244 B.C.) were also directed against the Schasu, the Cheta, whose
prince he took alive, the Amari (the Amorites) and the Pulista (the
Philistines, p. 164).

The inscriptions of these Pharaohs prove that the tribes of Syria, even
as early as the sixteenth century B.C., had arrived not only at a
settled mode of life, but at a vigorous trade and a civilisation far
from contemptible. The princes of Syria met Tuthmosis III. with numerous
war-chariots, of which in the battle of Megiddo they lost 924 (p. 132).
If Tuthmosis can mention 107 cities from Hamath in the north to Gaza in
the south which he had subjugated, the population must have been already
more numerous and the land more thickly inhabited. The names quoted
prove that Gaza (Kazatu), Damascus (Tamesku), Hamath (Hamtu), Joppa
(Japu), Berothai (Berytus), Kades (Kadeshu), Ashtaroth Karnaim
(Astartu), and many cities frequently mentioned at a later date, were
already in existence: several of them are represented to us on the
monuments of the Pharaohs, as situated on heights and surrounded by
strong walls.

The tribute received by Tuthmosis III. from Syria is sufficient evidence
that the valleys of Canaan were well cultivated, that extensive trade
relations had already been formed, and that metals were in use to a
considerable amount. Syria contributed to Tuthmosis not wine only, honey
and dates, but also considerable quantities of spices. The Retennu
contributed at one time 1,718 minæ of sweet wine. The Hittites
contributed 8 silver rings, weighing in all 301 Egyptian pounds, and 93
Egyptian pounds of gold; the Retennu paid 40 bars, and afterwards 80
bars (bricks) of iron; on one occasion they contributed 761 Egyptian
pounds, and in another year 1,495 pounds of silver and 55 pounds of
gold.[484] It was remarked above (p. 304) that these tributes also prove
that the measures and weights of Babylon were already in use in Syria at
that time.

The monuments of the Pharaohs also prove that the land was divided into
independent districts, governed by hereditary princes. The leading and
most powerful tribe at the time of the Ramessids was that of the
Hittites in the south of Canaan. In the fourteenth century B.C. this
tribe, with its confederates, could place 2,500 war chariots in the
field. We have already seen (p. 152) that the king of the Hittites, the
son of Maursar and grandson of Sepalulu, entered into an alliance and
compact with Rameses II., as one power with another. In the records of
the Egyptians the court and army of the Hittites are found well
arranged. Generals of the cavalry, masters of the horse, and scribes are
mentioned, and the sculptures of the Pharaohs exhibit the Hittites in
their chariots in magnificent clothing and armour. The inscriptions of
Rameses II. mention Baal and Astarte as gods of the Hittites--deities
which we have already found at Babylon under the names of Bel and Istar.
We have less information of the land of Kaft, of the Amari, and finally
of the Pulista, who are first mentioned under Rameses III., and of the
tribes of the Retennu to the north of the Cheta. As was remarked above,
the Pharaohs did not succeed in establishing a lasting supremacy over
Syria. Even Tuthmosis III., who achieved the greatest successes, did no
more than force the Syrian princes to pay him tribute for a short series
of years.

Thus the beginnings of settled life, of agriculture, of cities and trade
in Canaan cannot be placed later than the year 2,000 B.C., and this
result is confirmed by the tradition of the Hebrews. According to
Genesis, Ham, the second son of Noah, begat Canaan, and Canaan begat
Sidon, his firstborn, and Heth, and Amori, and Hivi, and Arvadi, and
Hamathi, and afterwards the families of the Canaanites were spread
abroad.[485] Hence, with the Hebrews, the Sidonians passed for the
oldest Canaanites. The name means Fishcatcher, and a tribe limited to a
narrow strip of coast may soon have betaken themselves to the sea. The
primogeniture of the Sidonians was afterwards explained to mean that the
origin of their city, Sidon, belonged to the oldest period. That the
second city of this tribe, Sor (Tyre), "the daughter of Sidon,"[486] was
proud of her great antiquity, we learn from other sources. When
Herodotus was there, and inquired about the erection of the most sacred
temple in the city, the temple of Melkarth, he received the answer that
this shrine had been built, together with the city, about 2,300 years
before his time, i.e. about the year 2,750 B.C. Lucian also assures us
that the temples of Phenicia and the temple of Melkarth at Tyre were
founded not much later than the oldest Egyptian temples.[487]

Northward of Sidon, at the mouths of the Nahr Ibrahim and the
Nahr-el-Kelb (Adonis and Lycus), was settled the tribe of the Giblites,
_i.e._ the mountaineers, whose cities were Gebal (Byblus) and Berothai
(Berytus). Byblus claimed to be the oldest city in the land--older than
Sidon--and to have been built by El, the supreme deity. At any rate, as
we have already seen, it was in existence at the time of Tuthmosis III.,
whose inscriptions also mention the city of a third tribe, that of
Arvadi, _i.e._ the Arvadites, whom the Hebrews mention among the sons of
Canaan. This tribe was in possession of a considerable district to the
north of Byblus, on the mouth of the Nahr-el-Kebir (Eleutherus), and of
a rocky island off the coast, on which lay their city Arvad, the Aratu
of the Egyptians, the Aradus of the Greeks.

The tradition of the Hebrews derived the Hittites from Heth, the second
son of Canaan. The centre of their land, which stretched from the coast
to the Jordan, was formed by the bare and stony mountains round Hebron.
Here, according to Hebrew story, giants once dwelt--the Anakim--whose
father and chief was Arba; after this prince, Hebron was formerly called
Kirjath-Arba. To this city also the Hebrews ascribe a great antiquity;
it was built seven years earlier than Zoan (Tanis) in Egypt.[488] We do
not know the date of the building of Zoan, but the name occurs as early
as the inscriptions of Sesurtesen I., whose reign we must place about
the year 2,350 B.C.[489] With the Hittites of Hebron the Hebrew
Scriptures represent their own forefathers as living in peaceful and
friendly intercourse in the century 2100-2000 _B.C._ We have already
seen what a sustained resistance the disciplined forces of the princes
of the Hittites were able to make against the attacks of Egypt for two
centuries--from the middle of the fifteenth to the middle of the
thirteenth century B.C. War against the Cheta is a standing item in the
inscriptions of the Ramessids.

Northward of the Hittites lay the tribes which the tradition of the
Hebrews derives from Hivi and Amori, the younger sons of Canaan, the
Hivites and Amorites--the former in the beautiful mountain valleys round
Gibeon and Sichem, northwards as far as Mount Hermon; the latter, a
numerous and powerful tribe, outside the land of Canaan, north-east of
Jordan, from the Jabbok in the south to Hermon in the north.[490] The
Amorites, as we may venture to assume, were the Amari of Egyptian
inscriptions. Furthest to the north, in the valley of the Orontes, were
the Hamathites, whom the Hebrews also reckon among the sons of Canaan.

On the other hand, the Damascenes, the northern neighbours of the
Amorites, whose city is mentioned by the Egyptians with Hamath as early
as the sixteenth century, and who in the ninth and eighth centuries B.C.
were the centre of the most powerful community in the Syrian interior,
were not reckoned by the Hebrews among the sons of Canaan; and the
inscriptions of the Assyrians also place the Damascenes among the Arimi,
_i.e._ Aramaeens. Nor are the old inhabitants of the valley of the
Jordan included by Hebrew tradition among the Canaanites, which is here
associated with the principalities of Sodom and Gomorrah, of Adamah,
Zeboim, and Zoar, and the names of the princes who once fought against
Kedor Laomer in the valley of Siddim. But Jehovah caused fire and
brimstone to rain upon Sodom and Gomorrah owing to the sins of the
inhabitants, and destroyed these cities and the whole region. The
Philistines also, whom we find in possession of the coast from Gaza in
the south to Carmel in the north, were not counted by the Hebrews among
the sons of Canaan. It has been remarked that the name occurs for the
first time in Egyptian inscriptions in the first half of the thirteenth
century B.C. The Hebrews tell us that the Philistines marched from
Caphtor and overcame the Avites, who dwell "in villages as far as Gaza."
By Caphtor we should probably understand the eastern sea coast of Egypt,
the north-east of the Delta, where a Semitic population may have
established itself firmly from the time of the Hyksos, and may have been
able to maintain themselves after their expulsion. Yet there is nothing
to contradict the assumption that, at the time of their expulsion by
Amosis and the Tuthmosis, a part of the Hyksos turned towards Syria, and
that the Philistines were sprung from these. We may remember that
Manetho terms the Hyksos Phenicians, or kinsmen of the Phenicians, and
tells us that they retired in the direction of Syria, and Herodotus
represents the shepherd Philitis as pasturing his flocks at
Memphis.[491] In the eleventh century B.C. we find the Philistines under
the dominion of the princes of the cities of Gaza, Ascalon, Ashdod,
Gath, and Ekron. The princes had their palaces; the cities were
protected by walls and towers, and possessed extensive temples, in which
were images of wood and iron, and rich offerings. The five cities formed
a federation, their princes (Seranim) sat in a common council, led out
their armies in common, and in common offered thankofferings for the
victories won. They could bring into the field a splendid army of
chariots, horsemen, heavy-armed soldiers, and bowmen; the soldiers were
divided into troops of hundreds and thousands.[492]

Towards the middle of the thirteenth century a considerable alteration
took place in the interior of Canaan, between the coast of the
Philistines and the valley of the Jordan. The Amorites advanced towards
the south over the Jabbok, and subjugated the Moabites, who dwelt in
this district to the east of the Dead Sea, as far as the Arnon. They
spread westwards over the Jordan, and overthrew the ancient federation
of the Hittites. These were either subjugated or driven out; only in
some mountain cantons did the Hittites maintain themselves. In their
place the Amorites ruled between the coast and the Dead Sea, and this
district was now known as the "Mountain of the Amorites."[493]

Northwards also the Amorites pressed forward against the Hittites, and
took possession of their land as far as Lake Merom.[494] It was only in
Gibeon and the surrounding districts that the Hivites held their
own;[495] and all the Hittites and Hivites who refused subjugation and
slavery were compelled to retire to the coast. It must have been a heavy
blow that could shatter the power of the Hittites; while the collection
of a numerous population on the coast, which was caused by the new
supremacy of the Amorites, was in its turn of important consequence for
the cities of Phenicia. But the new masters of the southern land did not
form a consolidated power, like the Hittites before them; they were
broken up into separate tribes, so that among them, and the remnants of
the Hittites and Hivites, there were about thirty small principalities.
The ancient power of the Hittites must have been important enough to
leave behind a very lasting impression. The Book of Joshua uses the
expression "land of the Hittites," for the whole region from the sea to
the Euphrates, and the Assyrian inscriptions of the ninth, eighth, and
seventh centuries include beside the land of Arimi, _i.e._ of the
Aramæans the whole of Canaan from Hamath to the sea and southwards as
far as Egypt, under the name of the "land of Chatti."[496]

FOOTNOTES:

[477] Strabo, p. 756. "It is true that the whole land from Seleucis to
Egypt and Arabia is also called Hollow Syria, but strictly speaking the
name is given only to the land between Libanus and Antilibanus."

[478] Strabo, p. 763.

[479] Genesis xxxi. 20-24; Strabo, pp. 627, 784.

[480] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 396.

[481] Tacit. "Histor." 5, 6.

[482] Ebers, "Ægypten und die Bücher Mose's," s. 131 ff.

[483] De Rougé, "Annales de Toutmes;" cf. _supra_ p. 136.

[484] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 80, 92.

[485] Genesis x. 15-19.

[486] Isaiah xxiii. 3; Justin, 18, 3.

[487] Herod. 2, 34; Lucian, "De dea Syria," 2, 3.

[488] Judges i. 10; Joshua xiv. 12, 15; xv. 13, 14; Numbers xiii. 23.

[489] Ebers, "Ægypten," s. 188.

[490] Genesis xv. 16; xxxiv. 2; Joshua iii. 10; xi. 3; Jud. iii. 3.

[491] Above, p. 127; Gen. x. 13, 14; Amos ix. 7; Deut. ii. 23;
Jeremiah xlvii. 4; Stark, "Gaza," s. 104 ff. Ebers explains Kaphtor
by _Kaft-ur_, _i.e._ Great Kaft, Great Phenicia. To Ai-Kaphtor the
Egyptian Aa-Kaft, _i.e._ island and coast land, curved coast land
would correspond.--"Ægypten," s. 131 ff.

[492] Stark, "Gaza," s. 132-136, 318 ff.

[493] Deut. i. 7, 20, 44; Joshua x. 5, 6; xi. 3. The Jebusites who
possessed the Jerusalem of later times were a tribe of the Amorites.
They and their king are expressly mentioned as Amorites.

[494] In the book of Joshua, as well as in the prophet Amos, it is the
Amorites whom the Hebrews have to contend against, mingled with scanty
remnants of the Hittites and Hivites. Besides this, the advance of the
Amorites against the Moabites is sufficiently proved (_vide_ Exodus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy), and the migration of the Hittites by their
settlement in Cyprus.

[495] Joshua ix. 7, 10.

[496] Joshua i. 4; Schrader, "Keilsch. und Alt. Test," s. 30.




CHAPTER VI.

THE RELIGIOUS RITES OF THE CANAANITES.


Our knowledge of the religious conceptions of the Canaanites consists of
scattered and meagre statements. Yet these statements are enough to show
with certainty that the ideas of the Syrians about the powers of Heaven
rested on the same basis as the worship of the Babylonians. But the
sensual and lascivious side of this worship, no less than the cruel and
bloody side, is more strongly and broadly developed in Syria than in
Babylonia, while, on the other hand, the complete development of the
star-worship, as we found it on the lower Euphrates, is unknown in
Syria. The gods who were regarded as alien and hostile to natural life
were worshipped by the Canaanites with severe abstinence and harsh
asceticism, with self-mutilation and human sacrifices; while the deities
of procreation and birth, who were considered favourable to life, were
worshipped with the most shameless prostitution and the most unbridled
debauchery. Indeed these rites, distinguished by sensual excess and
bloody asceticism, were united by that mysterious link which in the
human breast brings debauchery and pain into close connection; and hence
this worship is a true copy of the Semitic mode of feeling, which wavers
between luxurious enjoyment and fanatical destruction, between cringing
servility and stiff-necked obstinacy, between effeminate retirement in
the harem, and bold achievements in the battle-field.

The Phenicians are said to have possessed sacred scriptures of very
great antiquity. In Babylonia we found a city to which the sacred
scriptures were specially allotted, Sepharvaim on the Euphrates; in
Canaan, Debir, in the neighbourhood of Hebron, was at one time called
Kiriath Sepher, _i.e._ "city of scriptures." The scriptures of the
Phenicians are said to be derived from Esmun one of their gods, or from
a series of hierophants, Thabion, Isiris, Sanchuniathon and Mochus.
According to the evidence of Poseidonius, Mochus lived before the Trojan
war.[497] Sanchuniathon also, a Sidonian according to some, according to
others a Syrian, and to others a Berytean, is said to have lived before
or during the time of the Trojan war. He is said to have collected his
writings from the archives of the Phenician cities, from the records in
the temples, and a document of Hierombal which had been placed by the
latter before Abelbaal, king of Berytus, and had met with approval, and
it is maintained from the catalogue of the Phenician kings that
Hierombal and Sanchuniathon lived before the Trojan war.[498] Of the
writings of Sanchuniathon, Philo of Byblus, who wrote in the first half
of the second century, B.C., is said to have given a Greek translation
in his _History of the Phenicians_. Of this supposed translation of a
supposed original, discovered after much research by Philo, besides
which he pretended to have made use of the sacred scriptures of the
Egyptians, the Books of Thoth, some excerpts and fragments have come
down to us. Scanty and unconnected as these are, they show us at once
that Philo, whatever his original may have been, was far removed from
any mere repetition of old religious views, that the syncretistic
culture of his time had exercised a strong influence on his own ideas,
and that his whole point of view belongs to that kind of enlightenment
which pretended to find in the gods a number of deified kings, who had
once ruled over the land in ancient days. Yet Philo also allowed that,
over and above these, the sun, moon, planets, and certain elements were
worshipped as gods.[499]

Following the cosmogonic systems, as they may have been drawn out with
greater definiteness after the Hellenistic period, Philo assumes as the
beginning of all things an obscure and moving atmosphere, and a dark and
melancholy chaos. When the wind of his Beginning felt the yearning of
love, a mixture took place, and this combination was named Desire.
Desire is the beginning of all things. From the union of the wind with
itself arose Mot, which some explain as mud, others as putrefaction of a
watery mixture. Out of this arose the seeds of all and the origin of all
things. Mot was fashioned after the form of an egg. "And then shone
forth the sun and moon, and the great constellations. As the air now
sent forth a fiery glow, winds and clouds arose from the kindling of the
sea and the earth, and vast tempests of rain streamed down; and when all
this dashed together, there followed thunderings and lightning, by which
the creatures were awaked, and on the earth and in the sea the male and
the female elements began to move.[500] And from the wind Kolpia and his
wife Baau, which means night, Aeon and Protogonus, mortal men, were
begotten. Aeon discovered the nourishment obtained from trees. And Aeon
and Protogonus begot Genos and Genea, who dwelt in Phoenicia; and when
the fierce heat came they stretched out their hands to the sky and the
sun. As they regarded the sun as the only lord of the sky, they called
him Belsamen, which among the Phenicians means lord of the sky, and
among the Greeks Zeus." But Aeon and Protogonus had also begotten
children, called by the names of Phos (light), Pyr (fire), and Phlox
(flame). These discovered fire by rubbing two pieces of wood together,
and taught the use of fire, and begot children who surpassed all others
in size and stature. The names of these giants were given to the
mountains of which they possessed themselves, to Casius, Libanus,
Anti-libanus, and Brathy (Tabor?). The giants begot Samemrumus, who is
also called Hypsuranius, and Usous. These made a traffic of their
mothers, for it was the custom in those days for the women to associate
with any one. Samemrumus lived at Tyre, and discovered the art of making
huts out of reeds and sedge, while Usous invented clothing made of the
skins of the beasts which he knew how to slay. Samemrumus rebelled
against Usous, but the latter took a tree and divested it of the
branches, and was the first who went on board a vessel. Then he
dedicated two pillars to the fire and the wind, and offered to these the
blood of the beasts which he had taken. When the brothers were dead,
prayers were offered to the pillars, and each year a festival was
celebrated in honour of them. And for a long time afterwards Agreus (the
hunter) was among the descendants of Usous, and Halieus (the fisher)
among those of Samemrumus. From these sprung two brothers, of whom the
one was Chusor, _i.e._ Hephaestus, who discovered the working of iron,
and the other, who invented the fish-hook and was the first navigator,
was named Zeus Meilichius;[501] and the two together discovered the
building of walls by bricks. From these came Agros (the field), and
Agrotes (the husbandman), who was worshipped in Phoenicia as a god,
and was called the greatest god in Byblus. From these sprung Misor and
Sydyk; from Sydyk came the Cabiri, who invented the ship.

About this time Eljon, named "the Highest," was born, and a woman of the
name of Beruth; and these two dwelt at Byblus. They begot Uranus and Ge,
and when "the Highest" fell in conflict with wild beasts, he was
worshipped by his children as a god with libation and sacrifices. But
Uranus succeeded his father in the kingdom, and took his sister Ge to
wife, and with her begot El, who is also called Cronus, Dagon, who,
after discovering corn and the plough, was called Zeus Arotrius, and
Atlas. But as Uranus begot children with other women, El, when he was
grown up, determined to revenge the slight put upon his mother. He
provided himself with a sickle and a lance of iron, attacked Uranus,
drove him from his throne, expelled him from the land, and took the
kingdom for himself. He surrounded his house with a wall, and built
Byblus, the first city of the Phenicians. His brother Atlas, whom he
suspected, he threw into the abyss, and covered him with earth; his son
he slew with the sword, and cut off his daughter's head. When in the
thirty-second year of his reign he had laid an ambush for his father
Uranus in the interior of the land, and in this way had got him into his
power, he cut off his genitals, close by some springs and rivers. The
blood flowed into these springs and streams, and this place became
sacred, and is shown even at the present day. At the wish of El,
"Astarte the Great," the daughter of Uranus, and Zeus Demarus, the son
of Uranus by a concubine, and Adodus "the king of the gods," ruled over
the land. As a symbol of her supremacy, Astarte placed the head of an ox
on her own head, and when she had wandered over the whole earth she
found a star fallen from heaven, took it, and dedicated it at Tyre on
the sacred island. But when a pestilence came, and a mortality, El burnt
his only son in royal robes as a sacrifice to Uranus on the altar which
he had erected, and circumcised himself and forced his comrades to do
the same. The city of Byblus he handed over to the goddess Baaltis,
Berytus to the sea-god, to the Cabiri, and to the descendants of Agrotes
(the husbandman) and of Halieus (the fisher), and when El came into the
land of the South, he gave all Egypt over to Taauthus to be a royal
habitation for him. To El, after his death, was consecrated the star
named after him.[502]

We should indeed be in an evil case if we were restricted for our
knowledge of Canaanitish rites to these fragments, which carry so
plainly on the front of them their late origin, their fictitious
genealogical combinations, into which the gods are brought, their
over-subtle Euhemerism, and their mixture with Greek and Egyptian ideas.
That threads of various systems of cosmogony intertwine and cross each
other in these fragments is proved by the derivation of the origin of
the world, first from the wind, and next from chaos, and then from
Kolpia and Baau, and by the repetition even to the third time of the
discovery of hunting, agriculture, and navigation. Happily there are
other sources of information which allow us to bring the statements of
Philo into some sort of order, and to supplement them in very essential
points. We saw that the highest god of the Babylonians was El. If Philo
tells us that the star known by his name, _i.e._ the planet Saturn, was
consecrated to king El after his death, and if this king allows Astarte,
Demarus, and even Adodus, the king of the gods, to rule after his
death,--if he apportions cities and provinces to Baaltis and the
Cabiri,--it becomes clear enough that for the Canaanites also El was the
ruling god, and that in Syria also the planet Saturn belonged to him.
But from the contest of El with Uranus, _i.e._ with the sky-god, in
Philo, we may also with certainty conclude, that among the Canaanites
also the highest place was allotted to Baal-Samim, _i.e._ to the lord of
the sky, as Philo rightly explains that name; Philo denotes him as the
god worshipped by the earliest generations of mankind. Among the Greeks
also there was a myth, borrowed no doubt from the East, that Zeus (Baal)
had once striven with El-Cronus.[503] As the god of Saturn, the El of
the Canaanites would have to be placed beside the Adar of the Eastern
Semitic nations. The inscriptions of Ramses II. have already mentioned
Baal as the god of the Cheta. We also saw that the nomads of the
peninsula of Sinai consecrated their highest mountain summit to the god
of this name. The Moabites invoked Baal on Mount Peor. In Canaan also
the mountain summits were sacred to this deity; in the south of the land
the lonely peak of Casius on the Serbonian lake, then Carmel, Tabor, and
Hermon. The Philistines worshipped him at Ekron; the names of numerous
places in Canaan,--Baal Hamon, Baal Hazor, Baal Meon, Baal Gad, Baal
Perazim, Baal Tamar, Baalath, Baalbec, &c.,--give us sufficient proof
of the widespread worship of Baal in Canaan. We shall not go wrong if we
regard him as the deity of the beneficent operation of the sun. If El
cuts off the genitals of Uranus, _i.e._ of Baal-Samim, and the blood
flows into the springs and streams, the meaning of the myth is without
doubt that the beneficent god has imparted his life-giving, creating
power to the fertilising water. Among the Phenicians springs and streams
were sacred. The Carthaginian Hannibal swore to his compact with Philip
king of Macedonia before "the rivers, meadows, and waters," and the Zeus
Demarus of Philo must be explained as Baal Tamar, _i.e._ Baal in the
procreative power. Northward of Sidon there falls into the sea a river
especially sacred to Baal Tamar, which the Greeks called Tamyras (now
Nahr Damur). It marks, no doubt, the spot where the act in the myth was
localised, which, as Philo observes, was still pointed out. Pliny tells
us that with the Belus, _i.e._ Baal (Sihor Libnath of the Hebrews), a
mountain stream falling into the sea southward of Sidon, after a brief,
and in the plain, a sluggish course from the parent lake, customs of a
very sacred nature were connected.[504]

The goddess whom the Syrians invoked, beside the sun-god, had various
names. According to the fragments of Philo, El had handed over the
government of the city of Byblus to Baaltis, _i.e._ to Bilit, the
"mistress." At Ascalon she was known as Derceto, at Hierapolis (Bambyke,
Membidsh) as Atargatis;[505] the Hebrews call her Ashera. Herodotus
calls the goddess of Ascalon Aphrodite Urania; he also denotes her as
the goddess of the sexual impulse and of procreation, and mentions the
temple at Ascalon, as the oldest temple of this goddess which he knew;
"from this comes the shrine of Urania in Cyprus, as the Cyprians
themselves said; and the Phenicians, who also belonged to Syria, founded
the temple of Urania on Cythera." Pausanias observes that the Assyrians
had been the first among men to worship Urania, and after the Assyrians
came the Paphians in Cyprus, and the Phenicians at Ascalon.[506] Hence
we may conclude that Baaltis, in nature or in name, was not far removed
from the Bilit or Mylitta of the Babylonians, and this conclusion is
sufficiently confirmed by all that we know of the worship of Baaltis.
Cinyras, the first king of Byblus, is said to have erected shrines to
Aphrodite at Byblus and in Cyprus, and his daughters are said to have
paid service to the goddess with their persons. The maidens of Byblus
waited for strangers in the market-places, just as the maidens of
Babylon waited in the temple (p. 269), and the price of compliance was
paid, as in Babylon, to Aphrodite.[507] Of the maidens of Cyprus we are
told that they went down to the sea shore in order to sell themselves to
the sailors on landing.[508] We also find that sacred servants, male and
female, who dedicated themselves to this form of worship, were always to
be found in the temples of the Syrian goddess, and even married women
entered their ranks at certain times.[509] The Hebrews tell us that the
women wove tents for Ashera, and that paramours, male and female, were
in her sanctuaries.[510] In shady groves, on green hills, and among the
mountain forests of Libanus, sacrifice was offered to this goddess. The
lofty trees, the terebinth, the evergreen pine and the cypress were
sacred to her; the pomegranate, the symbol of fruitfulness, was her
peculiar fruit. The ram, the he-goat, and the dove, especially the white
dove, animals of vigorous procreation and reproduction, were dedicated
to her, and formed the most welcome offerings. In the temples of the
goddess before the cell in which she was worshipped under the form of
conical stones or upright pillars of wood, were dove-cotes and pools of
water.[511] Fish also were dedicated to this goddess; and certain kinds
of fish were sacred among the Syrians. These were not to be injured, and
enjoyed divine honours.[512] Beside the rich and ancient temple of
Derceto at Ascalon was a lake abounding in fish. At Hierapolis the image
of Atargatis, which had a dove on the head, was carried down to the lake
near the temple. This image of "the Assyrian Urania" was also carried
down to the sea, amid a great crowd collected from Syria, Arabia, and
Mesopotamia.[513] The image of Derceto at Ascalon, on the shore of the
sea, in that temple which was the oldest of Urania, known to Herodotus,
was a woman as far as the waist, but from the thighs downwards she had
the body of a fish.[514] From the custom of carrying the image of the
goddess to pools of water, and the form of the goddess at Ascalon, has
arisen the legend of the Greeks, that at Ascalon or Hierapolis she threw
herself into the water, and was changed into a fish. The colonies of
the Phenicians worshipped a Venus Marina, and the goddess of Berytus is
said to have come from the sea; with the Greeks the goddess of Cyprus
and Cythera is said to have risen from the sea.[515] Appian remarks that
the goddess of Hierapolis was regarded by some as Aphrodite, by others
as Hera, and by others again as the source and spring of all that came
out of moisture.[516] Hence the Bilit (Baaltis) of Byblus, the Derceto
of Ascalon, the Atargatis of Hierapolis, the Ashera of the Hebrews, was
a deity favourable to birth and fertility, the power of nature which
creates from moisture and water.

A male deity also, who gave fruit and increase from water, was
worshipped by the Canaanites. At Gaza and Ashdod, the cities of the
Philistines, and near the coast, at Beth-Dagon, and Kaphar-Dagon, the
god Dagon was invoked, whom Philo mentioned as the Zeus Arotrius, the
Zeus of the field, the god of nourishment. His temple at Gaza was the
pre-eminent shrine of the Philistines, the centre of their federation.
The image of Dagon in his temple at Ashdod had the face and hands of a
man, the body of a fish, and again the feet of a man.[517] Philo's
account denotes Dagon as the discoverer of the plough and the god of
nourishment, as the giver of corn and protector of the field, and
therefore he must in any case have been a spirit of increase and
fertility. We found the name of this god in Babylonian inscriptions of
the time of Hammurabi, and before it, his image, and that of his
priests, among the monuments of Assyria. We saw that his name designated
him as a fish-god, and know that Babylonian legends connected him with
the sea, and represented him as arising from the sea (p. 272).

By the side of the deities of the beneficent powers of nature and of
birth, the Canaanites placed severe and gloomy deities, who were averse
and hostile to the bloom of nature, the life and generation of mankind.
These were Moloch and Astarte. The first is known to the Greeks under
the name of Cronus, and from Philo's account of El we must deduce the
relation of this god to Saturn. The Moloch of the Canaanites is the
cruel destroying god of war; fire in its consuming, though also in its
purifying properties, was his element. He is said to have been
represented in the form of a bull or with a bull's head or horns.[518]
Among the booty which Sethos I. (1439-1388 B.C.) brought back from his
campaigns against the Cheta and Retennu we may see, in the sculptures at
Karnak (p. 150), the image of a bull.[519] The Canaanites offered human
sacrifices to Moloch. If we remember that the Sepharvites of Babylonia
offered up men to Adrammelech, _i.e._ "to king Adar," the spirit of the
planet Saturn, we may venture to regard the Moloch of the Canaanites as
the god of Saturn, without excluding the possibility that the burning
glow of the midsummer sun may have lain at the root of the Canaanite
conception of this god.[520] Not only were captives, often to the number
of thousands, sacrificed to Moloch in gratitude for the victory
bestowed;[521] but also at the beginning of an important undertaking, or
the opening of a campaign, his favour was sought by human sacrifices.
These were indispensable in order to appease his wrath, and turn
destruction from all upon the head of a few.[522] If the crops withered,
or a pestilence devastated the cities, or great reverses fell upon the
land in war, human victims were burned as expiatory offerings.[523] Such
offerings could only be taken from among the native families. Pure
victims as yet undefiled by sexual intercourse, children and youths,
were, as it seems, the most welcome sacrifice. The dearest possession
was the most powerful expiation. The best beloved children, the
firstborn or only son, must be offered to the god "as a ransom."[524] We
have seen above (p. 356), how Philo represents El himself as performing
this sacrifice of a son. Only the surrender of what was dearest could
touch the cruel feeling of the relentless god, and turn his wrath upon
the enemy so that he laid his curse upon him. Thus it came to pass that
the eldest son of the king was clothed with purple and burned to Moloch
in the place of the ruler of the land. When Joram, king of Israel, had
shut up the king of Moab in Kir Harosheth, "the Moabite took his
firstborn son, who would have been king in his place, and sacrificed him
as a burnt offering upon the wall. Then there was great indignation
against Israel, and Israel turned back to his own land."[525] Hamilcar,
Hanno's son, burnt himself in the year 480 B.C., when the battle of
Himera went against the Carthaginians; and when Himilco, in the year 406
B.C., besieged Agrigentum, and a pestilence came upon the army, he
sacrificed a boy to Cronus, in order to stay the plague.[526] When
Agathocles of Syracuse, after landing in Africa had defeated the
Carthaginian army, and encamped under the walls of Carthage, the
Carthaginians believed that they had brought the anger of the god upon
them because of late, instead of sacrificing the children of the noblest
citizens, they had secretly purchased and substituted other children.
Inquiry showed that this had been done in some cases. In expiation, 200
boys of the first families were selected as victims, and the families,
who were suspected of previously withdrawing their children from the
god, now spontaneously brought forward 300 children. "In Carthage," so
Diodorus, who tells us this incident, continues, "there was an iron
image of Cronus, which held out the hands in a downward position, so
that the victim placed upon them rolled into a cavity filled with
fire."[527] The cries of the victims, Plutarch tells us, were drowned by
the noise of drums and flutes; the mothers were compelled to stand by
without lamentation or sighing. If a sigh or a tear escaped them, they
were regarded as dishonoured; but the child was burnt just the same. A
Roman poet gives an invocation to the "paternal gods" of Carthage, whose
temples are cleansed by murder, and who rejoice in being worshipped by
the agony of mothers.[528]

The inscriptions of Ramses II. mentioned Astarte as the goddess of the
Hittites; the name of their city Astaroth we have already found in the
form of Astartu in the inscriptions of Tuthmosis III. (p. 343). The
Philistines worshipped Astarte; for the Sidonians, the "great Astarte"
was the goddess of their city. "A virgin-goddess"[529] she ruled over
the fortune of battle; she is the goddess of war, bringing death and
destruction, the goddess of death. Coins of Sidon represent her with a
spear in her hand. As the goddess of war she carried a spear in her
temples in Cyprus and Cythera.[530] In her temple on the ancient
fortress of Carthage, she was represented riding on a lion, with a spear
in her hand. The Istar of the Babylonians and Assyrians carried the bow
(p. 270). When the Philistines carried off the armour of Saul, king of
Israel, they dedicated it in the house of Astarte. If Astarte, according
to Philo, consecrates a star on the island of Tyre, we have already seen
(p. 270) that Venus when rising was the star of Istar at Babylon. Yet
the Astarte of the Syrians stood in a closer relation to the moon. Philo
told us that she carried on her head the head of an ox. The monuments of
Sethos display, beside the bull's image of Baal, a cow's head with a
segment of the moon; and on Carthaginian stones we find the full moon
between the horns of an ox. With the horns of the moon the goddess is
known as Astaroth Karnaim, _i.e._ the horned Astarte. The priests of
Astarte were pledged to continence and celibacy, and on the priestesses
of the "heavenly maiden," the "maiden of the sky,"[531] virginity was
imposed. No married woman could enter her temples. In her temples, as in
those of Moloch, burned the eternal fire.[532] Like Moloch, Astarte also
received human sacrifices. To the virgin-goddess the youthful were
offered, and maidens and women were burned.[533] As in the worship of
Ashera the Syrians attempted to transfuse themselves into the nature of
the goddess, to sink and pass into her being, so also the worship of
Astarte required that they should become like the goddess, and that lust
should be killed in them. It was the highest and most acceptable
sacrifice, if priests and laymen made themselves eunuchs in honour of
the virgin-goddess. During the festival of Astarte it was the custom,
while the congregated people were thrown into excitement and frenzy by
the sound of cymbals, drums, and double pipes, for young men to spring
forward, seize the ancient sword which lay on the altar of the goddess,
and therewith to mutilate themselves.[534] At a later time there were
thousands of eunuch-attendants in the temples of Astarte, while others
went about through the land in female clothing, their faces painted
after the manner of women, begging and mortifying their flesh. To the
sound of drums and pipes they whirled round with wild movements and
contortions of the body, and bent their heads to the ground, so that
their hair trailed in the mire. At the same time they bit their arms and
cut themselves with swords. The most frenzied began to moan and
prophesy. At last he bewailed his sins, took up the knotted whip, and
beat himself on the back till the blood ran down. When the dancing and
the scourging was ended, the eunuchs collected subscriptions from the
bystanders. Some gave money; others, milk, wine, cheese, and meal. These
they hastily gathered together in order to compensate, by a hearty meal
at evening in their retreat, for the torments of the day.[535]

These friendly and hostile, creative and destructive, natural and
supernatural powers stood mutually opposed in the religious
consciousness of the Syrians. Just as the Egyptians went forward, and
saw in the myth of Osiris the beneficent deity as the conqueror of the
evil god in the process of vegetative life and in the revolution of the
year, so did the Semitic nations unite the beneficent and destructive
powers of heaven in the same deities, who in turn dispensed blessing and
destruction, and by themselves and in themselves overcame the
destructive element. This combination is obvious in the form of Baal of
Tyre, whom the Tyrians invoked as the king and protector of their city
under the name of Melkarth,_ i.e._ city-king.[536] The Greeks identified
this god with their own Heracles; but as the protector of navigation and
the god of the sea, they are acquainted with Melkarth, under his native
name of Melicertes. Herodotus was astonished at the splendour of the
ancient temple of this god at Tyre, at the richness and beauty of the
votive offerings, and the two rectangular pillars in the temple, the one
of pure gold, the other of emerald, and so large that it shone by
night.[537] Hiram, king of Tyre, had dedicated the first about the year
1,000 B.C. to Melkarth. To the Phenicians Baal Melkarth was a labouring
and conquering deity, who creates new life out of destruction,
vanquishes the baneful signs in the zodiac, brings back the sun from
perigee and apogee, from excessive heat and wintry cold, to beneficial
operation, whose life is seen in the sun's course.[538] When the sun
burned with the fiercest glow, and stood in the sign of the lion, then
the good sun-god must vanquish the lion or symbol of fiery heat; he
pressed the lion to his own breast, forced back into himself the fiery
beams, and consumed himself in his own heat. The good sun-god must
overcome the evil sun-god, or he must consume himself, so that with
renewed youth he may again secure gentler warmth for the earth. When the
sun appeared most remote from the earth, Baal of Tyre had gone on a
journey or was asleep. In the Phenician colonies in the West, in Crete,
Sicily, and at Gades, in the distant land of the setting sun, were
pointed out the resting-places of the deity, from which he arose with
the vernal sun to new activity and life. At the end of February or the
beginning of March the festival of the awakening of the god took
place;[539] and if the Greeks tell us that Iolaus awoke the god, Iolaus
is merely a Grecised form of Jubal, _i.e._ the beauty of Baal, and
therefore only a mythical expression for the god himself as re-awakening
with the beautiful vernal sun.[540] From these ideas of strife and
conquest Melkarth could become in the eyes of the Phenicians a
warrior-hero, who was thought to have wandered over the earth, as the
sun revolves round it, in order to set it free from hostile powers. With
this conception may be connected the story that the procreative power
was taken from Uranus and transferred to the springs and rivers, and
that El's brother Atlas, _i.e._ Atel, a name which perhaps may be
explained as meaning darkness, is overthrown and cast into the abyss. In
the legends of the Phenicians it was Melkarth who reduced the barbarous
tribes of the distant coasts, who founded the ancient colonies of the
Phenicians on the western coasts of the Mediterranean, and set up, as
the boundary stone of his wanderings, the two great pillars at the end
of the earth, the rocks of Calpe and Abyle on the Straits of Gibraltar.
As the restrainer of the burning heat, of the lion, and of giants,
Melkarth is the Heracles of the Greeks; as a wandering god who gives
order to the life of mankind, he bears, in Greece, the names Minos and
Cadmus (the name Kadmon means, "the man of the East"), by which forms
they expressed not the deity only, but the old supremacy of the
Phenicians, and their settlements on their islands and coasts. The
Hebrews tell us that once, when a great drought attacked the land, the
priests of Baal assembled at Carmel and invoked the god to consume with
his rays the bull which they placed as a sacrifice on the billets of the
altar. But the god heard them not. Then Elijah, the prophet of the Jews,
mocked them. "Call louder," he said: "perhaps he is meditating or hath a
pursuit; he is on a journey, or perhaps he is asleep and will wake up
again." The priests called louder, and became frantic, and cut
themselves with knives and lancets, so that the blood gushed out.[541]

As Baal and Moloch, the beneficent and the baneful powers, were united
in Baal of Tyre, and in the form of Melkarth, so also was the goddess of
reproduction, of birth, and procreation amalgamated with the warrior
goddess, the maiden who brought death. It was this deity which in turn
gave blessing and destruction, sensual enjoyment and war, birth and
death. She inspired consuming sensual passion, and then caused death to
overtake her lover, even if she did not slay him herself. Thus a Roman
poet can put into the mouth of a Carthaginian the invocation, "Goddess
Astarte, power of gods and men, life and safety, and again destruction,
death, and dissolution."[542] We find that the Venus of Tyre was called
Astarte, that at Ashtaroth Karnaim, the ancient seat of the worship of
the horned Astarte, the maiden with the horns of the moon, there was a
sanctuary of Atargatis,[543] and that fire-festivals were celebrated at
Hierapolis in the sanctuary of Atargatis, which festivals belonged to
Astarte; that the Urania, _i.e._ the birth-goddess, of Ascalon, Cyprus,
and Cythera became an Aphrodite Areia, _i.e._ a warlike Aphrodite;[544]
that after Cinyras, the king of Byblus, whose daughters paid service to
the goddess of Byblus with their bodies, Pygmalion became king, and he
regarded with abhorrence the unchaste daughters of Cinyras, and
worshipped the pure goddess of heaven, and taught how to appease her
anger by human sacrifices.[545] At Carthage a good goddess of the sky
(_bona coelestis_) was worshipped beside an evil one (_inferna
coelestis_). If human sacrifices were here burnt to the goddess Dido,
just as the supposed foundress of Carthage is said to have burnt
herself,[546] her sister Anna, _i.e._ the charming one, was worshipped
with cheerful rites. Other accounts mention that the two sisters Dido
and Anna were one and the same goddess. Without doubt they are right. We
saw that with the Babylonians the planet Venus, when rising, was the
war-goddess Istar, and, when setting, she was Mylitta, the goddess of
love (p. 270).

The relation of the Tyrian goddess Astarte to the moon has already been
touched upon. As goddess of the moon, she was a changing, wandering
deity. With the waning light of the moon she retired into the gloom of
the west, the region of the setting sun; and on the disappearance of the
goddess on the "bad evening," the Tyrians performed rites of mourning.
As a "wandering goddess,"[547] Astarte was called among the Phenicians
Dido, _i.e._ the rover, and among the Westerns Europa, _i.e._ the dark
one.[548] With the retirement of the goddess was connected the legend
how her destructive power was overcome; it showed how Astarte could be
worshipped in Tyre as the wife of Melkarth, as Milkath (Melecheth,
_i.e._ queen).[549] The wandering sun-god went in search of the lost
goddess. At length he found her in the remote distance, and loosed her
girdle; the goddess surrendered herself to him, and sacred marriage
changed the warlike goddess into the friendly deity favourable to
procreation, Astarte into Ashera, Dido into Anna, Artemis or Athena into
Atargatis. The "maiden of the sky" is now the wife of the god of Tyre,
the Hera of the sky, the Ada (Athe) of the Syrians. From the embraces of
Melkarth and Astarte, the sun-god and the moon-goddess, and the conquest
of the cruel goddess of war, spring life, order, and law. The sacred
marriage is said to have taken place in the West, at Samothrace, and
further still, on the Cadmeia, the citadel of Cadmus,[550] _i.e._ of the
searching Melkarth, and finally beyond the pillars of the god, on the
happy islands of the Western Sea, where all fruits of every kind grew
spontaneously, especially the apples of life, the pomegranates of
Ashera, the apples of the Hesperides,--the pledge of love, the symbol of
life and light returning out of darkness. Here also Melkarth sank down
to rest in the streams of the Western Sea, which his beams had
warmed.[551]

The Syrians did not remain content with combining the beneficent and
destructive powers into one form only, into Baal-Melkarth and
Astarte-Ashera. While searching for the unity of the divine powers and
the divine nature, they also combined the male and female deities into
one figure, and the creative and receptive powers were amalgamated in
one and the same form. As the combination of mighty heroic power with
luxurious sensuality is the practical ideal of the East, so in theory
also the highest union of the powers of nature and divine being, the
amalgamation of male and female is attained by the same combination.
When Astarte had become Ashera, and had surrendered herself to the god,
the god in turn surrendered himself to the goddess. He plied female
tasks, she carried the weapons. But even their nature became one, their
forms were combined. Astarte and the Baal placed at her side became one
deity. The male deity of the Moabites was Camos. When Mesha, king of
Moab, took Nebo from the Israelites, he dedicated it to
Ashtor-Camos.[552] At Carthage Dido-Astarte was represented with the
beard of Melkarth.[553] At Paphos there was a standing image of the
bearded Aphrodite, which was worshipped as a great divinity. It is this
unification which lies at the root of the legends of Heracles (Melkarth)
and Omphale (perhaps, mother[554]), of Semiramis and Sardanapalus. At
certain festivals of Baal the priests and worshippers of the androgynous
deity appeared in red transparent female garments, and were otherwise
dressed as women, while the women were dressed as men, and carried
swords and lances.[555] The law of the Jews strictly forbids the
erection of Astartes and pillars, the bringing of the hire of the harlot
or the pay of the fornicator into the house of Jehovah, the tearing of
the skin, or the cutting of the hair (which was customary among the
Syrians in different ways as the symbol of the worship of certain
deities), and insists that no eunuch shall come into the people of
Jehovah, that no woman shall wear a man's clothes, and no man the
clothes of a woman.[556]

Philo told us above (p. 355) that Eljon of Byblus, who was called the
Highest, was slain in conflict with wild beasts, and was worshipped by
after generations with libations and sacrifice. In Byblus, under the
name Adonis (Adon, _i.e._ Lord), a god was worshipped, who was thought
to have disappeared, or to have been carried off in the bloom of youth.
Eljon and Adonis are one and the same form. When the maritime river
named after this deity, the Adonis (now Nahr Ibrahim), near Byblus,
began to run red in July (Thammuz), owing to the red earth washed down
from the mountains, then it was believed that the beautiful Adonis was
slain on Libanus by the savage boar of the war-god. With lamentations
and cries the women sat in the shrine at Byblus; or lingered by the
wayside lamenting the death of Adonis. They cut off their hair, tore
their breasts, and cried out--Ailanu, ailanu (woe to us). Adonis was
lost, and was now called Thammuz (the Departed).[557] A time of
lamentation was observed, during which his wooden image was washed and
anointed, and laid upon a bier, which the priests carried about with
their garments rent and beards shorn. But the god appeared again; he
came to life again, as it seems, with the new spring. And as the
lamentations for his death had been excessive, so also was the
sensuality with which his return to life was celebrated.[558] Hence we
must assume that in Adonis was personified the vernal sun, the bloom of
vegetation, which so soon begins to droop. If it was the boar of the
war-god, _i.e._ of Moloch, which slew Adonis, as one account maintains,
then in the minds of the Syrians the destructive sun-god, the glow of
the midsummer sun which makes vegetation wither, was the cause of the
death of Adonis.

Philo further told us of the two sons of the giants, the brothers
Samemrumus and Usous, at Tyre (p. 354). The name Samemrumus means the
High One of the Sky, a meaning which is clearly confirmed by the Greek
attribute Hypsuranius. Hence Samemrumus was the god, the Baal of Tyre,
Baal Melkarth. That Usous also was a god of Tyre is clear from the
observation of Eusebius, that Usous, a man of little account, had been
deified at Tyre beside Melicertes.[559] Usous, who knew how to catch
and destroy wild animals, and clad himself in their skins, the ancestor
of hunters, reminds us of the Esau of Hebrew tradition. Compared in
point of language the names of Usous and Esau coincide: "Usous" (Usov)
means, like "Esav," the hairy one. Completely reversing the natural
connection, Philo ascribes to Usous the erection of the pillars which
belong to his brother, and represents the hunter as embarking on the
earliest ship, whereas Samemrumus, the father of the fisherman, must
have embarked on the first ship. We saw that the name Sidon means
"fish-catchers" (p. 344). Hence the legends of the Phenicians carried
back the origin of the Sidonians, to whom not only the city of Sidon but
also Tyre belonged, to Baal Melkarth. From this god the tribe of the
Sidonians, as it seems, pretended to have sprung. At a later period the
mariners of the coast, _i.e._ the population of the harbour towns,
looked down with scorn on the shepherds and hunters of the mountains,
although they could not refuse to recognise the greater antiquity of
this mode of life. Usous, therefore, must be regarded as the elder
brother, the hunter of the mountains, like the Esau of the Hebrews,
while the younger Melkarth takes up his abode in Tyre. That Usous is the
firstborn is clear from Philo's remark, that Samemrumus rebelled against
his brother. The contrast between the two brothers is marked by the
statement of Eusebius, that Usous was of little account, more strongly
than in Philo. From this we may perhaps conclude that Usous, the older
god, was originally looked upon as a hostile power, as Baal Moloch;
while in Samemrumus the friendly, helpful, beneficent power of the deity
was personified as Baal Melkarth. An obscure trace of the contrast of
the two gods is to be found also in the name Surmubel, _i.e._ Opponent
of Baal, in Philo, which seems to belong to Baal Melkarth in opposition
to Baal Moloch.[560]

The gods, whom the various cities of the Phenicians worshipped as their
tutelary deities, were placed side by side as soon as the feeling of
community in the cities became more lively, and intercourse between them
more vigorous. Hence it came about that a common worship was also paid
to these tutelary deities. Beside their significance in the natural and
moral world, there resided from antiquity in certain deities peculiar
relations to hunting and agriculture, and it was natural that as naval
occupations, trade, and industry developed in the cities, the gods
should be brought into relation to these spheres of activity also. In
the same degree as it was felt that trade and commerce could only
prosper amid internal peace and security in the cities, and under the
protection of law and justice, the gods who maintained order in the
world must become the protectors of order and law in the cities. In this
feeling, and starting from conceptions of this kind, the priests of the
Phenicians brought the gods of their cities into a connected system
which, following the sacred number seven, included seven gods. The
deities brought into this circle were known by the collective name
Cabirim, i.e. the "Powerful," the "Great." Among the descendants of the
"field" and the "husbandman," Philo has already mentioned Misor, _i.e._
Sydyk (justice). As powers ruling in justice, law, and equity, and
maintaining order in the cities, the Cabiri are the children of Sydyk.
The Greeks call them children of the sun-god, _i.e._ of Baal Samim; and
if others connect the Cabiri with Ptah, the god of light among the
Egyptians, the conclusion to be drawn is, that it was Baal Samim who, in
his relation to the Cabiri, was denoted by the name of the Just, the
supreme champion of justice. From the hunter and the fisher Philo
derives Chusor, who discovered the working of iron; he calls him
Hephæstus (p. 354). Chusor, so far as we can tell, was the foremost
deity within the circle of the Cabiri. Phenician coins exhibit him with
a leather apron, hammer, and tongs; the name seems to denote "arranger."
He was the tutelary god of the life of the cities occupied in navigation
and handicraft. Next to Chusor came a female deity, Chusarthis, also
called Turo (Thorah, law), whom the Greeks call by the name Harmonia. As
the same deity is also called the goddess of the moon, we cannot doubt
that Chusarthis is Astarte, which is also sufficiently clear from other
evidence; only in the new system the severe goddess was connected in a
definite manner with the upholding of justice and preservation of law.
Next to Astarte in the series of the Cabiri comes Baal Melkarth of Tyre,
who is known to the Greeks under the name of Cadmus. He is regarded as
the discoverer of mining and masonry and the inventor of writing. He
searches for the lost Harmonia, and with her when found celebrates the
sacred marriage. Hence Cadmus could be worshipped in this system as a
life-awakening, phallic god, as well as the tutelar god of marriage. A
peculiar reverence was enjoyed among the Cabiri by the deity who was
added as an eighth to these seven; his name was Esmun, _i.e._ the
Eighth. In this form it seems that the peculiarities of the seven gods
were taken up and gathered together. At any rate in Carthage the temple
of Esmun stood in the Byrsa, and on the highest part of it. In this
temple the holiest relics of the city were preserved and the most
important deliberations held. The Greeks call Esmun by the name of
Asclepius, but also add that he was different from the Greek Asclepius.
He was, it appears, a healing, _i.e._ an appeasing deity, like Jasion in
the Cabiric mysteries of Samothrace. Esmun is also compared and
confounded with Hermes, as with the Thoth of the Egyptians. Just as
Thoth revealed the sacred books of the Egyptians, did Esmun reveal the
sacred books of the Phenicians. Esmun was represented with a serpent in
his hand as the serpent-holder (Ophiuchus), and his head as surrounded
by eight rays. The forms of the eight tutelar gods were carved by the
Phenicians on the prows of their ships; it was the Cabiri, as Philo told
us, who discovered the ship. Even now Phenician coins exhibit the Cabiri
in that dwarfed and distorted form in which the Phenicians loved to
represent the nature and superhuman power of the gods.[561]

From the circumstance that the Greeks, when settling in Lemnos, Imbros,
Samothrace, and Rhodes, found the worship of the Cabiri in existence,
and adopted it, though not without certain alterations, we may conclude
that the Cabiric system was established before the year 1000 B.C. In the
tutelary gods of the sea-loving nation of the Phenicians the Greeks
recognised and worshipped the deities favourable to mariners, and from
this side they combined them with their own Dioscuri. On the other side
the myth of Melkarth and Astarte, who were adopted into this circle of
divinities, the myth of Melkarth, who discovers the lost moon-goddess in
the land of gloom, and returns thence with her to new light and life,
and who wakes to new life after the slumber of the winter, gave the
Greeks an opportunity of connecting with the mysteries of the Cabiri
those conceptions of the life after death, which grew up among them
after the beginning of the sixth century.

When the great deities had been combined with the circle of the Cabiri,
the subordinate spirits followed in their course. By degrees a scheme of
thrice seven was reached, a scheme of twenty-one or rather twenty-two
deities, since an eighth was added to the seven Cabiri. These, beginning
with El, were arranged according to the twenty-two letters of the
Phenician alphabet, and stood in a certain relation to them. From this
number of deities, their various names, and the order of succession,
various schemes of the origin of the gods were developed, and with the
help of these genealogies certain systems of theogony and cosmogony were
formed, of which the dislocated and confused fragments were found in
Philo; and the chief of them I have given above. The wind Kolpia (p.
353) modern research would explain by Kol-pyah, _i.e._ "breath of the
month;" Baau, the wife of this wind, by Bohu, _i.e._ Chaos, the
Tohu-wa-Bohu of the Hebrews. The more abstract the potentialities with
which these systems begin, the later we may assume their origin to be.

Like the Arabs, the Syrians originally worshipped their gods upon the
mountains and in stones; then they erected pillars of wood and stone to
them, and images, figures of bulls, or shapes combined from the forms of
men and fish. They also erected statues male and female, or androgynous.
At the great festivals the sacred tents and chests in which ancient
symbols and tokens of the deities were preserved, or the images of the
gods, were carried round in solemn procession.[562] Of the festival in
the temple of Atargatis, at Hierapolis, we have already spoken (p. 360);
of the fire-festival which the Tyrians held in the spring, Lucian tells
us: "They trim great trees, set them up in the court of the temple, and
bring goats, sheep, birds, and other victims. These they fasten to the
trees, and in addition, clothes and gold and silver jewellery. After
these preliminaries they carry the images of the gods round the trees;
the pyre is then kindled, and all consumed."[563]

As we may conclude from Lucian's account and from ruins, the temples
were on a tolerably extensive scale. There were two or three courts, one
after the other, either rectangular as at Paphus and Marathus, or oval,
as at Malta and Gaulus, surrounded by strong walls, and furnished with
pillars, altars, and pools of water. With these was connected a narrow
and small shrine, containing the sacred stone or image. The tithes
belonged to the gods. Every year, at the festival of Melkarth, in Tyre,
an embassy appeared from Carthage which offered to the god of the mother
city the tenth of the revenue of their state, and after great victories
the Carthaginians probably sent a tenth of the spoil to the gods of
Tyre.[564] The number of priests was great; we often find hundreds
engaged in a single sacrifice,[565] and the ritual was complicated. The
human sacrifices, mutilation, and prostitution, by which the Syrians
sought to win the favour of their deities, we have already heard of. At
a later time at all the great sanctuaries there were thousands of male
and female servants beside the priests. The priests lived on the tithes,
the temple lands, and the part which fell to them in the sacrifices. The
ritual distinguished burnt offerings, offerings of purification,
expiatory offerings, and offerings of the first fruits; besides animals
and the firstlings of the field, sacrificial cakes were frequently
offered. The bull was the most acceptable victim; cows were not
sacrificed, nor the flesh eaten. Beside bulls, rams and he-goats, and of
birds, the dove, the partridge, the quail, and the goose were offered.
The animals were required to be pure, without blemish, of the male sex,
and capable of procreation. To guard against the offering of unclean
beasts, the priests of Hierapolis refused to sacrifice any but those
bought from themselves.[566] Two Phenician inscriptions of Massilia and
Carthage have come down to us from the fourth century B.C., containing
the edicts of the Carthaginian Suffetes about the part of the sacrifice
belonging to the priests, the fee to be paid for the sacrifice, and
finally the price of the victims purchased of the priests. The
Carthaginian inscription lays down the rule that of a bull, a ram, or a
goat, offered as a burnt-offering, the skin was to be the property of
the priests and the inwards the property of the person presenting the
victim. Moreover, of every victim offered, the cut and roasted flesh
went to the priests. On the other hand, the inscription of Massilia
gives the skin to those who present the victim (the law of the Hebrews
also gives the skin of a burnt-offering to the man who offers the
victim), but according to this decree the victims must be bought from
the priests. For a bull ten shekels were to be paid to them, and though
the tariff at Carthage lays upon the sacrificer a fee of only 2 _sus_
for each head of fowl sacrificed, the inscription of Massilia raises the
fee to 3/4 of a shekel and 2 sus.[567]

FOOTNOTES:

[497] In Strabo, p. 756.

[498] Philo. Frag. 1. ed. Müller.

[499] Philon. frag. 1, 6, 7, ed. Müller.

[500] _Loc. cit._ 2, 1-4, ed. Müller; cf. Bunsen, "Ægypten," 5, 1, 257
ff.

[501] Such is obviously the meaning of this passage.--Baudissin, "Abh.
z. semit. Relig." s. 14.

[502] Fragm. 2, 4, 5, ed. Müller.

[503] Pausan. 5, 7, 10.

[504] "Hist. Nat." 36, 65.

[505] Athar-ath, _i.e._ Astarte-Athe; Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 431.
Diod. 2, 4, 30. 2 Maccab. xi. 26.

[506] Herod. 1, 105. Pausan. 1, 14, 7.

[507] Lucian, "De Dea Syria," c. 16. The cutting off of the hair which
Lucian mentions is also a vicarious custom.

[508] Justin. 18, 3.

[509] Movers, "Phoeniz." Encycl. v. Ersch. s. 388, ff.

[510] 2 Kings xxiii. 7. Ezek. xxiii. 40, ff.

[511] Movers, "Phoeniz." 1, 197, 579; Munter, "Tempel der Göttin von
Paphos," and the Syrian coins in De Luynes, "Numismatique," pl. 1.
Lucian, "De Dea Syr." 13, 28. On the pillars of Marathus and Paphos,
Gerhard, "Kunst der Phoeniker," s. 23.

[512] Xenoph. "Anab." 1, 4; Diod. 2, 4; Lucian, _loc. cit._ 14.

[513] Lucian, _loc. cit._ 33, 39.

[514] Stark, "Forschungen," s. 248, ff.

[515] Avien. "Ora maritima," v. 305.

[516] De Bell. Parth. 28.

[517] Judges xiv. 23; 1 Samuel, v. ff.

[518] Gesenius, "Monum. Tab." 25. Silius Ital. Pun. 3, 104.

[519] Osborne, "Egypt," p. 144.

[520] Baudissin ("Jahve et Moloch," p. 47) regards the amalgamation of
Moloch and Adar as of later origin; to me the connection between Saturn
and the sun (Diod. 2, 30) appears of later origin.

[521] _e.g._ Diod. 20, 65.

[522] Justin. 18, 6. 19, 1; Plin. "H. N." 36, 4.

[523] Curtius, 4, 15, ed. Mützell; "Porphyr. de Abstinentiâ," 2, 56.

[524] Euseb. "Præcept. Evang." 4, 26.

[525] 2 Kings iii. 27; see below.

[526] Diod. 13, 86.

[527] Diod. 20, 14.

[528] Plut. "De Superstitione," p. 171; Sil. Ital. 4, 767.

[529] Numen virginale; virgo cælestis.

[530] De Luynes, "Numism." pl. v.; Hockh. "Kreta," 1, 98.

[531] Lucian, "De Dea Syria," 4, 32; Augustin, "De Civitate Dei," 2, 26.

[532] Movers, "Religion der Phoen." s. 605, 611, 621 ff.

[533] Procop. "De bello Persico," 2, 28.

[534] Lucian, "De Dea Syr." 15, 27, 43, 50, 51.

[535] Movers, "Religion der Phoen.," s. 681.

[536] "Our Lord Melkarth, Baal of Tyre," as he is called in an
inscription found at Malta.

[537] Herod. 2, 44; Plin. H. N. 37, 75; Theophr. "De Lap." 25.

[538] Thus Virgil says of the minstrel of Dido: "Canit errantem lunam,
solisque labores," Æn. 1, 742.

[539] Joseph. Ant. 8, 53; Movers, "Religion der Phoenizier," s. 150.

[540] Athen. p. 392; Movers, _loc. cit._ s. 536.

[541] 1 Kings xviii. 28.

[542] Plaut. "Merc." 4, 6.

[543] Cic. "De Nat. Deorum," 3, 23; 1 Macc. v. 43; 2, xii. 26.

[544] Pausan. 3, 23, 1.

[545] Movers, "Phoeniz." 2, 230.

[546] Sil. Ital. 4, 81, 819; Justin. 18, 6.

[547] Virg. "Æn." 1, 742.

[548] Hesychius: "[Greek: Eurôpon skoteinon platy. Eurôpê hê chôra tês
dyseôs ê skoteinê."] That Europe is Astarte follows from Hesychius:
[Greek: "Hellôpia, heortê Eurôpês en Krêtê]." The "Etymolog. Mag." pp.
232, 333, says: "Europa was anciently called Hellotia, '[Greek: hoti hoi
Phoinikes tên parthenon Hellôtian klousin].'" Eloth signifies "goddess."

[549] Jeremiah vii. 18; xliv. 17-23.

[550] Pindar, "Pyth." 3, 90; Cic. "De Nat. Deor." 3, 23.

[551] Appian, "De Reb. Hisp." c. 2; Movers, "Kolonieen der
Phoenizier," s. 63 ff. We shall see below what a conglomeration of
fables the Greeks have gathered round the wandering Astarte, who rides
on a bull and is represented with the crescent of the moon, and a cow's
horns. With them she is not only Europe whom the Bull-Zeus carries from
Phoenicia, who is sought by Cadmus the son of Phoenix. In her crescent
and cow's horns they also recognise their Argive Moon-goddess, Io, and
represent her as wandering to Phoenicia and Egypt, where Isis, who here
again wears the cow's horns or head, or is entirely represented as a
cow, becomes their Io. The wanderings of Dido-Astarte then became
confused with the stories of Helena, with the wanderings and fortunes of
the foundress of Carthage, and the travels of Æneas, the favourite of
Aphrodite, were directed to the most famous seats of the worship of
Ashera.

[552] Nöldeke, "Inschrift des Mesa."

[553] Serv. ad Æn. 2, 632; Gerhard, "Kunst der Phoeniker," s. 36, 38.

[554] According to Lenormant, _um-pali_, "mother of the sword."

[555] Joh. Lyd. "De Mensibus," 4, 46.

[556] Lev. xix, 27-29; Deut. xiv. 1; xxii. 5; xvi. 21; xxiii. 1.

[557] Ezek. viii. 14.

[558] Lucian, "De Dea Syria," c. 8; Strabo, p. 755.

[559] "De Laudib. Constant." c. 13.

[560] Bunsen, "Ægypten," 5, 1, 379.

[561] Herod. 3, 37; Gerhard, "Kunst der Phoenicker Taf." 4, 5; Movers,
"Phoenizier," 2, 87-99; "Phoeniz." in Ersch. s. 391 ff.

[562] Jerem. x. 5; Baruch, vi. 3, xxv. 26; Diod. 20, 65.

[563] Lucian, "De Dea Syria," c. 49.

[564] Polyb. 31, 20; Diod. 20, 14; Just. 18, 7; Curt, 4, 13.

[565] 1 Kings xviii. 17-24.

[566] Movers, "Phoeniz." in Ersch. s. 419.

[567] Movers, "Opferwesen der Karthager," s. 8; Blau, "Opfertarif von
Karthago;" Zeitschrift d. d. M. G. 16, 438.




CHAPTER VII.

THE ORIGIN AND DESCENT OF THE HEBREWS.


The tradition of the Hebrews of the early history and fortunes of their
people previous to the settlement in Canaan is contained in the books of
the Pentateuch. After they had settled in that land and had passed
beyond the loose combination of their tribes to the unity of civic life,
after a monarchy had been established, and under it a metropolis and a
centre for the national religion had been founded, the priesthood
engaged in this worship began to collect together ritualistic
observances and customs of law, and to write them down in combination
with anything still living about their early history in the traditions
of their families. The Hebrews had found existing in Canaan that ancient
and many-sided civilisation the nature and extent of which we have
already attempted to describe. Of their own history they could have
preserved nothing but prominent facts and decisive crises. Songs of
praise and victory which celebrated the great events of the Hebrew past,
such as the exodus from Egypt and the victories won over the Canaanites,
of which some were already written down,[568] forms of blessing,
genealogies,[569] isolated fragments of the moral law, or time-honoured
sacrificial custom, or ancient rules of justice,[570] and finally
narration of the wars,[571] constituted fixed points of connection in
this tradition. At the new centre of religious worship the whole stock
of existing ritual and custom had to be brought under review, and from
hence provision made for the use of the true and acceptable kind of
sacrifice, and sentence of law. The consideration of the marvellous lot
which had fallen to the Hebrews, the rise of a feeble shepherd tribe
under the powerful protection of Egypt, the liberation from the dominion
of this great kingdom, the conquest of Canaan, the capture of ancient
and strongly-fortified cities, "of fields which they had not tilled, of
vineyards and olive-gardens which they had not planted, of wells which
they had not dug, of cities which they had not builded," caused the
Hebrews to recognise in the favour which had attended them the direct
guidance of their deity. This grace would remain with them if they
continued to worship the god of their fathers according to his will, in
the way acceptable to him. Thus to the priests, who undertook the task
of writing down the tradition, the nation appeared as a chosen people
from the beginning, to whom their god had early given his blessing. In
return for such grace and beneficence the Hebrews had to obey his law.
This is the "covenant" which Jehovah has made with them.[572] This law,
therefore, must be carefully recorded, in order that it may be obeyed
exactly in every particular by the priests themselves, as by the judges
and all the nation.

On the basis of this tradition, these songs and poems, genealogies and
ancient records, and under the guidance of the views just pointed out,
there arose at Hebron, in the first decade of the reign of David,
within the circle of a priestly family, which apparently claimed to be
sprung from Aaron, the brother of Moses, the Judæan text of the
Pentateuch, and the Book of Joshua.[573] Composed as annals, this text
deals primarily with the connection and course of the fortunes of
Israel; the central point is the covenant between Jehovah (Elohim) and
Israel, Israel and Jehovah, and the law, which is the body of this
covenant.[574] The unity of religious worship and the centralisation of
it at one place and one only is brought prominently forward, and this
could not have happened till political unity had been obtained, a
metropolis founded, and a seat erected there for the worship of the
whole nation, or at least contemplated, if not erected. The law for the
priests, the minute details of ritual which make up the chief part of
this text, were, in the view of the priests, given at that mighty time
when Moses led the people; though, as a matter of fact, only a few of
the fundamental precepts reached so far back (see below). The
centralisation of the worship also at one place of sacrifice, the
command to have a common place of worship, was thought to have been in
existence as early as the time of Moses, and to have been prescribed
even when the Hebrews were in the desert. And the priests were more
inclined to believe that the ideal sought after for their religion, for
Church and State, belonged to the time of Moses, because in those days
of piety and exaltation the true ordinances must have been in existence,
and certain sacrificial institutions, certain principles of law and
morality, actually came down from that period.

Not long after this first text arose a second, which, however, can
hardly have been composed in priestly circles, and certainly did not
come from Judah. With the author of this second text, it is not the
collection and establishment of the law, and the desire to insist on the
obedience to it, which is the main point. It is rather the personal
fortunes of the fathers of the race, in which the divine guidance is
shown, the manifestations of the deity in their favour, the revelations
made to them by divine messengers, the importance of old customs and old
names, on which he lays especial weight. He also availed himself of
older written sources.[575] The language and style of this second text
are more lively, versatile, and distinct than those of the first; and
the importance which he ascribes to the fortunes of Joseph and the
tribes of Ephraim confirms the assumption that the author belonged to
this tribe. The origin of this second text falls in the second half of
Solomon's reign, or immediately after it--in the decades from 970 to 950
B.C.[576]

About a hundred years later, towards the middle of the ninth century
B.C., both these texts were combined and transformed into one work. The
author of this combined text (the Jahvist) was guided by the feelings
and views of the prophets. He is superior to the authors of the two
texts in versatility, in reflection, and vivid power of imagination. Not
only did he work up the two texts into one and insert into the whole his
own views, but he has added some sections, the materials of which must
have been furnished partly by tradition and partly by written
records.[577] In this shape were the first four books of the Pentateuch,
the beginning and the end of the fifth book, and the book of Joshua, at
the time of the prophets Amos and Hosea. The "Second Law," _i.e._ the
main portion of the fifth book of the Pentateuch,[578] on the other
hand, was not written till the time of king Josiah, about 625 B.C., and
was then added to the rest. The author of this second law also revised
the book of Joshua.[579]

If we compare the Hebrew account of the Creation with the cosmogonies of
Berosus and Philo (pp. 257, 353), and the narrative of Noah's deluge
with the description of the flood on the Assyrian tablets and in Berosus
(p. 240 ff.), we see at the first glance how far asunder the conceptions
lie--with what clearness and vigour the Hebrews have succeeded in
purifying and exalting the rude fancies of the nations so closely akin
to them--the ancient common possession of the Eastern Semitic tribes,
from whom the Hebrews were sprung. This power--the patient labour, the
serious and thoughtful effort to deepen the traditions of the past into
an ethical significance, to sublimate legends into simple moral
teaching, and transplant the myth into the region of moral earnestness
and moral purpose--to pass beyond the rude naturalism of their kinsmen
into the supernatural--from the varied polytheism of Babel and Canaan to
monotheism--this it is which gives to the Hebrews the first place, and
not among Semitic nations only, in the sphere of religious feeling and
development. At a later period the Greeks understood how to breathe
life, beauty and nobility into the gods of the Phenicians, whose rites
came over to Hellas; they could change Ashera-Bilit, the goddess of
prostitution, into the youthful Aphrodite, the goddess of blooming
grace, and the highest charm of love; but the Hebrews practised the
severer, sterner, and loftier task of carrying religious feeling beyond
the life of nature, of conceiving the highest power as morally in
opposition to natural impulses and forces, of publishing the supremacy
of the intellectual and moral over the natural being.

Adam begot Seth, so we are told in the first book of the Pentateuch, and
Seth begot Enos, and Enos begot Kenan, and Kenan begot Mahalaleel, and
Mahalaleel begot Jared, and Jared begot Enoch, and Enoch begot
Methuselah, and Methuselah begot Lamech, and Lamech begot Noah, and Noah
begot Shem, Ham, and Japheth. The earth was full of evil, but Noah
walked with God. Then God said to Noah: Make for thyself an ark of
gopher-wood, 300 cubits in length, 50 cubits in breadth, and 30 cubits
in height. For I will send a flood upon the earth to destroy under the
heaven all flesh wherein is the breath of life. But with thee I make my
covenant; and thou shalt go into the ark, thou and thy three sons and
thy wife, and the three wives of thy sons with thee. And of all living
creatures thou shalt bring two into the ark, male and female shall they
be. And Noah did as God commanded him. When Noah was 600 years old, in
the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, the fountains of
the deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened, and
there was rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights, and the
waters rose and lifted the ark. And the flood was mighty, and all the
high mountains that are under heaven were covered; the water rose
fifteen cubits above the tops of the mountains. For 150 days the flood
was mighty on the earth. Then God caused a wind to blow, and the waters
sank. And in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, the
ark rested on the mountains of the land of Ararat; and in the tenth
month, on the first day, the tops of the mountains appeared. It came to
pass after forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark, and sent
out a raven; but it flew to and fro. Then he sent out a dove, to see
whether the water had retired from the earth. But the dove found no
place of rest, and returned to the ark. And Noah remained seven days
more, and again sent out the dove. Then the dove came to him at evening,
and lo! a fresh olive-branch was in her mouth. And he remained yet seven
days, and again sent out the dove, but she returned to him no more. Then
Noah opened the door of the ark and looked out, and lo! the earth was
dry. And in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, the
earth was dry. And Noah went out of the ark, and his sons, and his wife,
and the wives of his sons, and he built an altar to Jehovah, and took of
all clean beasts and birds and offered a burnt sacrifice upon the altar.
After the flood sons were born to the sons of Noah. The sons of Shem
were Elam and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud and Aram. Arphaxad begot
Salah, and Salah begot Eber. Eber had two sons, the name of the one was
Peleg, and the name of the other Joktan. Peleg begot Reu, and Reu begot
Serug, and Serug begot Nahor, and Nahor begot Terah.

Terah dwelt in the land of his nativity at Ur in Chaldæa, and his sons
were Abraham, Nahor, and Haran. Haran begot Lot and Milcah and Iscah,
and died before his father at Ur in Chaldæa. Nahor took Milcah to wife,
and Abraham took Sarah. And Terah went with Abraham his son, and Lot the
son of Haran, from Ur in Chaldæa to Haran and dwelt there. But Jehovah
said to Abraham: "Go from thy land, and thy home, and thy father's
house, to a land which I will show thee." Then Abraham took Sarah his
wife, and Lot, his brother's son, and all their goods, and the souls
born to them in Haran, and went forth from Haran. He came unto the land
of Canaan as far as Sichem and to the oak Moreh, and there he built to
Jehovah an altar; and afterwards he went towards the mountain and
pitched his tent between Bethel and Ai, and there he built an altar to
Jehovah, and journeyed towards the south. And when the famine was sore
in the land, Abraham, and Lot with him, went to Egypt, and Pharaoh, for
Sarah's sake, gave Abraham sheep and oxen and asses, and men-servants,
and maid-servants, and she-asses, and camels. But Jehovah smote Pharaoh
with great plagues, so that he let Abraham and Sarah go, and bade men
guide him.

Then Abraham dwelt again at Bethel, and was very rich in flocks, in
silver and gold. Lot also had tents and sheep and oxen, and there was a
strife between the shepherds of Abraham and the shepherds of Lot. Then
Abraham said to Lot: "Let there be no strife between my shepherds and
thine, for we are brethren. If thou wilt go to the left hand, I will go
to the right." Then Lot lifted up his eyes, and saw the land of Jordan,
that it was watered as a garden of the Lord; and he set forth at
morning, and pitched his tents at Sodom. But Jehovah said to Abraham:
"Lift up thine eyes; the whole land which thou seest I will give to thee
and thy seed for ever; rise up and go through the length and breadth of
the land, for I will give it to thee." And Abraham pitched his tents
under the oaks, which are at Kirjath-Arba (Hebron), and there built an
altar to Jehovah.

For twelve years the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, of Adamah, Zeboiim and
Zoar, had served Kedor-Laomer, king of Elam. Then they rebelled; and in
the fourteenth year Kedor-Laomer, and the kings who were with him,
Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Tidal and Arioch of Elassar, smote the
Rephaims at Ashtaroth-Karnaim, the Zuzims at Ham, and the Emims at
Shaveh-Kiriathaim, and the Horites on their mountain of Seir, and smote
the whole land of the Amalekites and Amorites. The kings of Sodom and
Gomorrah also, of Adamah, Zeboiim and Zoar, who had drawn out against
them in the valley of Siddim, were put to flight, and fled to the
mountains, and all the goods and all the food in Sodom and Gomorrah were
taken, and they also took Lot and his goods. When Abraham heard that his
brother's son was carried away, he set forth with his servants, 318 in
number, and fell upon them by night at Dan, and pursued them as far as
Hobah, which is to the west of Damascus, and brought back all the goods
and Lot and the people that were captured. The king of Sodom came to him
and said: Give me the souls, and take the goods for thyself. But Abraham
said: I lift up my hand to Jehovah that I will take nothing of thee,
save what my servants have eaten.

Abraham dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, but his wife bore him no
son. But he had an Egyptian maid-servant whose name was Hagar. Her Sarah
gave him to wife, and Hagar was with child, and the angel of Jehovah
announced to her that she should bear a son who would be like a wild
ass, and his hand would be against every man and every man's hand
against him, and he would dwell to the east of his brethren. And Hagar
bore Abraham a son, and Abraham named him Ishmael. Then he received the
promise that Sarah also should bear a son, "from whom should arise kings
and nations;" and when he was 100 years old, and in the south between
Kadesh and Sur, Sarah bore him a son. Abraham named him Isaac, and
circumcised him when he was eight days old. The year before he had
circumcised Ishmael, for God had said: This is the covenant which thou
shalt keep between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, that every male
shall be circumcised.

When Isaac grew up and Sarah saw the son of the Egyptian woman, she said
to Abraham: Thrust out this woman and her son; Ishmael shall not be heir
with Isaac. Then Abraham gave Hagar bread and a bottle of water on her
shoulders, and sent her forth with her child. She wandered into the
desert of Beersheba, i.e. the well of the seven, and when the water was
spent, and the child was fainting with thirst, she laid him down under a
bush, and sat down a bow-shot from him, and said: "Let me not see the
death of the child." Then Jehovah heard the voice of the child, and His
angel called to Hagar out of heaven: "Fear not, rise up, and take the
boy in thy hand, Jehovah will make him a great people." And Jehovah
opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water, and filled the bottle, and
gave her child drink. And Jehovah was with him; he grew up in the
desert, and was an archer, and dwelt in the desert of Paran, and his
mother took him a wife out of Egypt, and Ishmael begot Nebajoth, and
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, and Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa, and
Hadar, and Tema, and Jetur, and Naphish, and Kedemah, twelve princes.
And Ishmael died 137 years old, and his descendants dwelt to the east of
his brethren from Shur, which lies before Egypt, to Havilah, and towards
Asshur.

Abraham abode a long time in the land of the Philistines. And God
tempted Abraham, and bade him sacrifice his only son Isaac, in the land
of Moriah, as a burnt offering. But when Abraham had built the altar on
the top of the mountain, and laid the wood upon it, and bound Isaac and
laid him on the altar, and taken the knife and stretched forth his hand
to slay his son, the angel of Jehovah called from heaven, saying: Lay
not thine hand on the lad, for now I know that thou fearest God; thou
hast not refused Him thine only son. And Abraham saw a ram caught in the
thicket, and he sacrificed him.

When Sarah died at Hebron, Abraham spoke to the Hittites among whom he
dwelt: I am a stranger and a sojourner among you; give me a
burying-place for my people among you, that I may put away my dead from
me. Speak for me with Ephron, the son of Zohar, that he give me the cave
of Machpelah which is his, at the corner of his field; let him give it
to me for a burying-place at its full worth in money. Ephron agreed, and
Abraham weighed the money to Ephron, four hundred shekels of silver,
current money with the merchant. And thus the field of Ephron at
Machpelah, to the east of Mamre, that is Hebron, the field and the cave,
and all the trees on the field and round it, were given to Abraham
before the eyes of the Hittites, and the eyes of all who went into the
gates of the city. And Abraham buried Sarah in the cave of the field of
Machpelah.

Then Abraham took another wife, whose name was Keturah, and she bore him
Zimram, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. But
Isaac had grown a man, and Abraham said to his servant, the oldest in
his house, Eliezer of Damascus: Lay thy hand under my thigh; I charge
thee that thou take not to my son a wife from the daughters of the
Canaanites, among whom we dwell; to my fatherland and my home thou shalt
go, and there seek a wife for Isaac. Then the servant took ten camels
from the camels of his master, and goods of every kind, and passed over
the Euphrates towards Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor, the brother of
Abraham. To Nahor his wife Milcah, the daughter of Haran, had borne
eight sons. The youngest was Bethuel, and Bethuel's son was Laban, and
his daughter Rebekah. Eliezer came to the city of Nahor at evening, and
halted his camels at the well outside the city. Then came a maiden, fair
to behold, with her pitcher on her shoulder, to the well. When she had
filled her pitcher and come up from the well, the servant went to her
and said: Bend down thy pitcher and let me drink a little water. Drink,
my lord, she answered, and quickly took the pitcher in her hand, and
gave him to drink. Then she said: I will draw also for thy camels, and
stepped down again to the well. Eliezer marvelled at her; and when all
the camels had drunk, he took a golden ring, half a shekel in weight,
and two golden bracelets, ten shekels in weight, and put the ring in her
nose, and the bracelets on her arm, and then inquired whose daughter she
was, and whether there was room in her father's house to shelter him and
the camels. And she answered: I am Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel, the
son of Nahor; straw and fodder is in abundance with us, and room for the
camels. And her brother Laban came to the well, and led Eliezer to the
house, and Laban took the saddles from the camels, spread straw for
them, and gave them fodder and brought water for his guest to wash his
feet, and food. But Eliezer said: I will not eat till I have given my
message. I am the servant of Abraham, and Jehovah has blessed my master,
so that he has become great, and he has given him sheep and oxen, and
silver and gold, and men-servants, and maid-servants, and camels and
asses. And Sarah has borne a son to my master in his old age, and I have
sworn to seek a wife for his son from his home and his own people; and
Jehovah led me in the right path in order to take the granddaughter of
the brother of my master for his son. If ye are willing to plight troth
and love with Abraham, say it. Then said Bethuel, Rebekah's father, and
Laban her brother: Behold, the maiden stands before thee, take her and
go. Then Eliezer brought forth gold and silver ornaments, and garments,
and gave them to Rebekah; to her brother also and her mother he gave
gifts. And when Laban and his mother sent away Rebekah with her nurse
Deborah, and Abraham's servant Eliezer, they blessed Rebekah, and said:
Become a thousand times a thousand, and may thy seed possess the gate of
thy enemies. When Eliezer returned home, he told all that he had done,
and Isaac received Rebekah into the tent of his mother, and she became
his wife, and he loved her. And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac;
but to Ishmael and the sons of Keturah he gave gifts, and sent them away
from his son Isaac into the land to the East. Then Abraham, after he had
lived 175 years, died at a good old age, and his sons Isaac and Ishmael
buried him in the cave of Machpelah.

These narratives show that the Hebrews derived the origin of their
nation from the land of the Euphrates and Tigris. We remarked above that
the legend of the Deluge could only have arisen in river valleys,
exposed to severe inundations (p. 245). If we set aside the additions
made in the prophetic revision, the narrative of the flood belongs to
the first text; in this text therefore the nations of the earth were
derived from the sons of Noah. The revision adds that the descendants of
Noah, in their journey from the East, found a plain in the land of
Shinar, i.e. Babylonia, and dwelt there, and erected a city and a tower,
intended to reach to heaven. Then Jehovah confounded their language and
scattered them over the earth.[580] But it is the first text which gives
the genealogy of Abraham, according to which the descendant of Noah,
Terah, the father of Abraham, dwells in the land of his nativity, at Ur
in Chaldæa. We found that Ur lay on the lower Euphrates, where the ruins
of Mugheir mark its site, that the oldest buildings in Babylonia belong
to this place, and the oldest sovereigns on the Euphrates called
themselves kings of Ur (p. 259). From Ur Terah, according to the first
text, journeyed with his family to Haran.[581] Haran lies in a wide
plain surrounded by hills on the Skirtos, a tributary of the Belik, at
no great distance from the Euphrates; it is the Carrhae of western
writers. From Haran Abraham turns towards Canaan; but his brother's
tribe remains in Haran. Hence, as the oldest writings of the Hebrews
without any doubt derive the progenitors of the nation from Ur and
Carrhae in the land of the Euphrates, so later authorities maintain, as
an absolute certainty, that "the fathers dwelt beyond the river," _i.e._
the Euphrates. In the "second law" Abraham is called a "wandering
Aramæan," and Ezekiel calls Chaldæa "the birthplace of the
Hebrews."[582] The name "Hebrews" confirms this statement and view.
Heber means "that which is beyond," "those who dwell beyond." The
Hebrews call themselves the sons of Israel; the name of Hebrews they
received from the Canaanites, into whose land they forced a way, though
the Canaanites, no doubt, meant no more by the name than that the sons
of Israel dwelt on the other side of the Jordan, before they set foot in
Canaan.

But the genealogy of the Hebrews goes far beyond Carrhæ and Ur. After
enumerating the ten patriarchs from Adam, _i.e._ from the man "formed of
earth" (adama) to Noah, and giving the age of these patriarchs in
hundreds of years (the highest age is 969, and the lowest is the
seventh, 365), the first text enumerates another set of ten patriarchs
from the sons of Noah down to Abraham, and of these the age gradually
dwindles from 600 to 175 years.[583] The head of this series, Shem, the
eldest son of Noah, the friend of God, is the immediate progenitor of
the Hebrews. That the recollection and feeling of the relationship with
the inhabitants of the land of the two streams, and with the population
of Aram, _i.e._ of the upper land between the Tigris and Euphrates, the
Euphrates and the Jordan, and with portions of the inhabitants of
Arabia and Asia Minor, was alive and present in the minds of the
Hebrews, is clear from the fact that these nations, akin in tribe and
blood and language, were carried back to Shem. From Arphaxad, the third
son of Shem, sprang the fathers of the Hebrews; the two first sons Elam
and Asshur, we already know as the progenitors of the Elamites and
Assyrians. From Lud and Aram, the fourth and fifth sons of Shem, the
Lydians and Aramæeans were derived, a genealogy which certainly belongs
to the Ephraimitic, if not to the Judæan text. In Arphaxad, the name of
the third son, we cannot mistake the name of a district any more than in
the names of the other sons. Arphaxad is a mountain canton of South
Armenia, between the lakes of Van and Urumiah,--the Arrapachitis[584] of
the Greeks, the Alpak of the Armenians, the modern Albak--and lies more
than 6,000 feet high, at the source of the Great Zab, which also flows
through it.[585] The son of Arphaxad is Salah, _i.e._ "leaving,"
"departure," and the son of Salah is Eber, in whom we have the later
name of the Israelites, transformed into a patriarch. To Eber two sons
are allotted. The name of the elder, Peleg, means division, "because in
his time the earth was divided." From this we may draw the conclusion
that the division of the descendants of Noah and the separation of the
nations was transferred to the fifth generation after him. But another
meaning may also be given on linguistic grounds to the name Peleg
(Phaleg), and at the juncture of the Chaboras and the Euphrates we find
a place of the name of Phalga.[586] Joktan, the second son of Eber, we
know already as the father of those Arabian tribes who dwell from Mesha
to Dshafar, and in Kachtan we have already found his name in Arab
tradition (p. 326). The descendants of Peleg, the elder son of Eber, are
Reu, and Serug the son of Reu. The name Serug appears to have been
retained in the district of Serug, and the modern Serudsh, south-west of
Edessa, in the neighbourhood of the Euphrates. Western writers speak of
the district of Osrhoene, and give this name to the south-west of
Mesopotamia.[587] Serug's son is Nahor, _i.e._ "the river," the
Euphrates. Nahor is followed by Terah, who had his home at Ur.

If this series of the first text preserved a genuine historical
recollection, a portion of a Semitic tribe, settled in the mountains of
South Armenia, or even the whole tribe--the sons of Arphaxad--journeyed
to the south, after leaving nothing but their name in the mountain
valley. The separation from their kindred was signified by the name
Salah, _i.e._ "leaving." At first the sons of Arphaxad pastured their
flocks at Serudsh, in the north-west of Mesopotamia, and from thence
they passed to Ur on the lower Euphrates, while another branch, the sons
of Joktan, turned away from the mouth of the Euphrates in the direction
of Arabia. At a later time the sons of Arphaxad settled at Ur must again
have marched up the Euphrates to Carrhae. Then followed a second
division; one portion, the Nahorites, _i.e._ the people of the river,
remained at Carrhae, while others, the Abrahamites, wandered to Canaan,
or rather into the deserts bordering on Canaan. Moreover, since the
first text denotes Abraham's eldest son Ishmael, as the progenitor of
the Ishmaelites, _i.e._ of a considerable number of tribes of North and
Central Arabia, and since the revision derives the Midianites, who
wandered on the peninsula of Sinai, and further in the East, and other
Arabian tribes, from the sons of Keturah, the younger sons of Abraham
(pp. 324, 393), it follows that on the borders of Canaan a portion of
the Abrahamites must again have broken off, and passed on to the
peninsula of Arabia.

However this may be, the kinship of the Hebrews with the Babylonians,
Assyrians, and Aramæans, the derivation of their tribe from the
river-land of the Euphrates and Tigris, is beyond a doubt, and we must
regard the districts of Arphaxad and Serug, of Ur and Carrhæ, as the
original home of the tribe, which afterwards grew up to be the Hebrews.
In any case it is clear from this genealogical table that the Hebrews
considered themselves closely allied to the Nahorites of Haran, but more
especially to a considerable number of the Arabian tribes, or
Ishmaelites, _i.e._ the Nebajoths, the Kedarites, the Temanites, the
Jeturites, and finally the Midianites. This is proved, not only by the
derivation of the Ishmaelites from the eldest son of Abraham, but also
by the close relationship in which the Edomites, the brothers of the
Hebrews, are represented as standing to the Ishmaelites. The names
Ishmael and Israel are similarly formed; the first means "God (El)
hears," the second, "God strives," or "God rules."

Within this circle of kindred nations, the Hebrews occupy the foremost
place. The Ishmaelites are descended, it is true, from the eldest son of
Abraham; but not from a legitimate or equal marriage; the mother of
their tribe is a maid-servant and an Egyptian. Ishmael's wife also came
from Egypt, and, in this there may linger a dim recollection of the
ancient supremacy of the Hyksos in Egypt.[588] The Midianites, on the
other hand, spring from a younger branch than the Hebrews; and they too
are not born from the true wife of Abraham, and hence are not his
genuine heirs. To the Moabites also, who pastured their flocks to the
east of the Dead Sea, and the Ammonites, whose land lay to the
north-east of this sea, the Hebrews held themselves akin. These tribes
are the descendants of Lot, Abraham's brother's son; and therefore they,
like the Hebrews themselves, spring from those who had moved from
Carrhae to the West. But Lot had separated from Abraham, and chosen the
region of Jordan. And when Jehovah rained fire and brimstone upon Sodom
and Gomorrah, because the sins of their inhabitants were grievous, and
overthrew these cities, and the whole land around them, Lot with his two
daughters escaped towards the East; but because all the men of Sodom
were destroyed, there was no man to dwell with Lot's daughters. Then
they gave their father wine to drink, and lay with him, and the elder
bore Moab, and the younger Ammon. Thus although the Moabites and
Ammonites are closely allied to the Hebrews, and are of the pure
stock--they were begotten in incest. A dark stain rests on their origin.
Obviously the bitter hostility which afterwards prevailed between the
Hebrews, and the Moabites and Ammonites, and the severe wounds which the
Hebrews suffered from the attacks of these nations, have had their
influence in forming and moulding the story of their origin. The Judæan
text narrated quite simply the separation of Abraham and Lot, the
choice of the land of Jordan, the destruction of the cities, and Lot's
escape.[589] The broader details and motives given in the narrative are
the work of the prophetic revision, to which the account of the origin
of the Moabites and Ammonites exclusively belongs.

To the Hebrews, the wanderings and fortunes of their forefathers
appeared compressed into the lives of the patriarchs, whose mighty forms
are also to them the patterns of morality, piety, and a life pleasing to
God, the expression of the genuine national character. The name Abraham
means, in the form ab-ram, "high father;" in the form ab-raham, "father
of the multitude." Sarah means "princess." Their right to the
possessions, which they won in Canaan by the sword, they saw in the
command given to their ancestors to go thither, and in the promise that
the land should belong to his seed, which is given to Abraham, even in
the first text. Moreover, the purchase which Abraham concluded with the
Hittites of Hebron of a burying-place for his wife and himself in the
cave of Machpelah--this narrative is a part of the Judæan text--and the
services rendered by Abraham to Canaan gave to his descendants a claim
to the possession of Canaan. Abraham planted the trees at Beersheba, and
dug wells; he defended Canaan against Kedor-Laomer, and recovered from
the kings of the east the booty taken, without keeping back any for
himself. These services of the progenitor also constituted a claim for
his descendants.

The accounts in Genesis[590] of campaigns of Elamite rulers towards the
west, and the supremacy of a king of Elam, one of the Kudurids, over
Syria, are founded on events and circumstances which occurred about the
year 2000 B.C., as has been already pointed out in detail (p. 251). The
connection into which Abraham is brought with them is the work of the
Hebrews, and belongs to the Ephraimitic text.[591] The account which
puts the Horites, who occupied Mount Seir before the Edomites, among the
nations conquered by the Elamites, and beside these certain extinct and
mythical tribes--the Rephaites, Susites, and Emites--shows plainly that
the events must belong to a very distant past.

When the rights of the Hebrews to Canaan had been proved, when at the
same time it was ascertained that the kindred tribes of Moab and Ammon
could establish no claim to the land, after the voluntary renunciation
of their progenitor, it remained to be shown that the ancient
inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites themselves, had been from the
first destined to give way to the Hebrews. We found that the Canaanites,
like the Hebrews, belonged to the great family of the Semitic nations;
but they were distinguished from them in character, in dialect, and
religious conceptions. Hence they were not derived from Shem, but from
Noah's second son, Ham; and they were also burdened with the curse of
Noah--a trait which the prophetic reviser has added to the
narrative.[592] After the flood, Noah planted a vineyard, and he became
drunken, and uncovered himself in his tent; and Ham, the father of
Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, but Shem and Japhet went
backwards and covered him. And when Noah heard what Ham had done, he
said, "Cursed be Ham; a servant of servants shall he be to his
brethren."

Abraham passed through the length and breadth of Canaan, the land which
his descendants were destined to possess. At Shechem and Hebron, and
then in the south, at Kadesh (Barnea) and Shur, he abode longest; at
Hebron, and between Bethel and Ai, he built an altar to Jehovah. The
presence of the patriarchs consecrated the places where his descendants
were to dwell; among the Hittites and the Canaanites Abraham remained
true to the God who had led him into Canaan; he rendered a willing
obedience even to the harshest command. At the places where Abraham had
set up altars, and where he had offered sacrifice, we find at a later
period centres of Hebrew worship: by Abraham's sacrifices they were
already consecrated. The Judæan text places the abode of Abraham mainly
in the south of Canaan, at Hebron; the south belonged mainly to the
tribe of Judah, and Hebron was David's royal abode till he conquered
Jerusalem from the Jebusites. The Ephraimitic text placed Abraham mainly
at Shechem, the chief city of the tribe of Ephraim, and gives especial
prominence to the sacred place at Bethel. The wandering of Abraham from
the south of Canaan to Egypt, where the Pharaoh, warned by plagues from
Jehovah, sends him away with valuable presents and in peace, is the work
of the reviser. It is an anticipation of the later sojourn of the
Hebrews in Egypt, and forms at the same time a contrast to the widely
different circumstances of their exodus.

After long waiting, the true son is at length born to the patriarch from
his wife, of the blood of his fathers in Haran.[593] In order to
preserve the blood of the Hebrews pure, a wife is not taken from Canaan
for this son, Isaac, but the care of the father provides a wife from
among his kindred, the tribe of the Nahorites, on the Euphrates. The
first text tells us quite briefly, "Isaac was forty years old when he
took to wife Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel, the Aramæan of
Mesopotamia, the sister of Laban the Aramæan."[594] The lively
description of the journey and the suit of Eliezer is the work of the
reviser of the two original texts. After thus providing for the
continuance of the pure stock, when the oldest son, the child of Hagar,
and the younger sons, the children of Keturah, had been sent away with
presents, as the law of the Hebrews afterwards ordained for the sons of
concubines, and directed to the East, when he had given everything into
the hand of Isaac, Abraham died full of years and blessings.

Isaac was now sixty years old--such is the account given in Genesis--and
his wife Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel, the sister of Laban, had
borne him no son. Then Isaac besought Jehovah for his wife, and Jehovah
heard him. Rebekah became with child, and lo! there were twins in her
womb, and the children strove in her womb; and Jehovah said to her: Two
nations are in thy body, and two people shall separate from thy bosom.
The first boy was red in colour, and hairy, and she called him Esau; and
afterwards his brother came out, and his hand was upon Esau's heel, and
he was called Jacob, _i.e._ "one that holds the heel." And the boys
grew; and Esau was a hunter, but Jacob abode in the tents, and his
mother loved him. Once Esau returned weary from hunting, as Jacob was
making a mess of pottage. And Esau said: Give me to eat. And Jacob
replied: Sell me first thy birthright, and pledge it to me. And Esau
swore, and sold his birthright, and ate and drank, and went his way.
Thus Esau despised his birthright; and when he was forty years old, he
took to wife Judith, the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basmath
(Bashemath), the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and afterwards Mahalath,
the daughter of Ishmael, Nebajoth's sister.

There was a famine in Canaan, and Isaac went to Gerar in the land of the
Philistines, and there dwelt, and sowed in that land, and received a
hundredfold, for Jehovah blessed him. He became more and more mighty,
and had sheep, and oxen, and many servants. And Isaac dug out the wells
which Abraham's servants had made, and which the Philistines had filled
up after the death of Abraham. And the shepherds of Gerar strove with
the shepherds of Isaac, and Isaac called the name of the wells Esek
(contention) and Sitnah (hatred); but to the third, for which the
shepherds of Gerar had not striven, he gave the name Rehoboth (room).
From thence he went to Beersheba, and there he set up an altar.

When Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, he said to Esau: Take thy bow
and quiver, hunt venison for me, and make a savoury dish such as I love,
that I may eat, and my soul may bless thee before I die. Esau went
forth, but Rebekah, who had heard Isaac's speech, said to Jacob: Go to
the flock and bring me two kids. I will prepare them for a savoury dish
for thy father, that he may bless thee instead of Esau. Jacob obeyed,
and Rebekah put on him the clothes of Esau, and placed on his neck and
hands the skins of the kids, that his father, if he touched him, might
not know Jacob by his smooth skin. Then Jacob went in to his father, and
said: I am Esau, thy firstborn; eat of my venison. How hast thou found
it so quickly, my son? asked the father. Jehovah, thy God, put it into
my hand, he replied. The voice is the voice of Jacob, the father said,
but the hands are the hands of Esau. He ate, and Jacob brought him wine,
and he drank. Then Isaac said: Come near, and kiss me, my son. God give
thee the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and abundance
of corn and wine. Be thou lord over thy brethren, and let the sons of
thy mother bow before thee. Cursed be they who curse thee, and blessed
be they who bless thee. And when Jacob had gone away from his father
with this blessing, Esau came with his venison. Isaac trembled and said:
Thy brother has come with subtilty, and taken away thy blessing. Then
Esau lifted up his voice and wept, and said: My birthright has he taken
from me, and now thy blessing also. Bless me, even me also, O my father.
What can I do for thee? answered Isaac. Lo! I have made him thy lord,
and all his brethren I have given him for servants, and I have given him
corn and wine. Hast thou but one blessing? said Esau, and wept. Then
Isaac said: Thy dwelling shall be without the fatness of the earth and
the dew of heaven. By thy sword thou shalt live; thou shalt serve thy
brother, but his yoke thou shalt break from off thy neck.

Esau was at enmity with Jacob, because he had deceived him in his
father's blessing; and Esau said in his heart: The days of mourning for
my father will come, for I will slay Jacob. Then Rebekah said to Jacob:
Arise and flee to Laban, my brother, in Haran, till the anger of thy
brother is turned away. And Rebekah spoke to Isaac, that Jacob should
not take a wife from the daughters of the Hittites; and Isaac bade Jacob
go to Mesopotamia, to the house of Bethuel, the father of his mother,
and there take a wife from the daughters of Laban. Then Jacob went from
Beersheba to Haran. And when he abode for the night at the city of Luz,
he put a stone under his head, and there rested. Then in a dream he saw
a ladder placed upon the earth, the end of which touched heaven, and the
angels of God went up and down upon the ladder. Jehovah stood over it,
and said: I am the God of Abraham thy father and of Isaac; the land
whereon thou sleepest I will give to thee and thy seed. And in the
morning Jacob arose, and set up the stone which he had placed under his
head for a sign, and poured oil on the stone, and called the name of the
place Bethel.

In the land of the children of the east Jacob saw a well, round which
lay three flocks of sheep. Then Jacob said to the shepherds: Whence are
ye, my brethren? They answered, From Haran. Jacob asked again: Know ye
Laban, Nahor's son? And they said: We know him; it is well with him, and
lo! there is Rachel, his daughter, with the sheep of her father. And
Jacob rolled away the great stone, which lay at the mouth of the well,
and watered Rachel's sheep; and Laban came, and took his sister's son
into his house. Laban had two daughters: Leah the eldest had dim eyes,
but Rachel was fair to look upon; and Jacob said to Laban: I will serve
seven years for Rachel. And these seven years were as seven days in
Jacob's eyes, because he loved Rachel. When the time was past, Laban
gathered together all the people of the place, and made a feast. But in
the dark of the evening he brought Leah instead of Rachel to Jacob, and
it was not till the morning that Jacob knew Leah. Why hast thou deceived
me? Jacob asked of Laban; have I not served thee seven years for Rachel?
Laban answered, It is not so done in our country, to give the younger
daughter before the firstborn. Serve me yet seven years, and thou shalt
have Rachel also to wife. So Jacob abode seven years more with Laban,
and gained Rachel for his second wife, and he kept Laban's flock for six
years more, and the sheep increased under Jacob's hand.

Leah bore Jacob four sons; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah. But Rachel
was barren and bore not. Then Rachel gave her maid Bilhah to Jacob, and
Bilhah bore two sons, Dan and Naphtali. Leah also gave her maid Zilpah
to Jacob, and she bore Gad and Asher. Then Leah bore Issachar and
Zebulon; and Jehovah heard Rachel, and sent her a son, whom she called
Joseph. When Joseph was born, Jacob said to Laban: For twenty years I
have been with thee; thy sheep and thy goats have not cast their young,
and the rams of thy flock I have not eaten. Let me depart that I may go
to my own land, with my wives and children, and give me my hire. What
shall I give thee? asked Laban. Set aside all that are striped and
spotted among thy sheep and goats, and whatever is afterwards born
striped or spotted among thy sheep and goats, that shall be my hire,
said Jacob. And Laban said: Be it according to thy word. Then Jacob set
apart the coloured sheep and goats; and when the time of generation
came, he took fresh wands of maple and almond-wood, and made white
strips in them, by peeling off the bark, and cast them into the wells
and runnels, where Laban's sheep and goats were watered; and everything
was born spotted, and fell to Jacob's share, so that he became mighty,
and gained many sheep and camels, and asses, and maid-servants, and
men-servants. But Laban's countenance was not towards him as heretofore;
and Laban's sons were angry and said: He has got his wealth from that
which is our father's. Then Jacob arose, when Laban was gone to the
shearing, and set forth secretly with his wives and children, and
flocks; and Rachel took the images from the house of her father, and
carried them with her, and Jacob fled over the river, and set his face
towards Mount Gilead. Then Laban hastened after him, and came up with
him on Mount Gilead, and said: "Why art thou fleeing secretly before me,
so that I cannot accompany thee with drums, and music, and singing? why
hast thou not allowed me to kiss my daughters, and why hast thou taken
my gods?" Jacob answered: "I was afraid, for I thought thou wouldest
take thy daughters from me." And Jacob set up a stone on Mount Gilead,
and they made a heap of stones, and offered sacrifice on the heap, and
Laban said: "The God of Abraham and the God of Nahor be judge between
us, and guardian that thou do not afflict my daughters, or take other
wives to them; and this heap be witness that I go not after thee for
evil, nor shalt thou come beyond this sign after me for evil." And Jacob
swore by him, whom his father feared, and offered sacrifice on the
mountain. And the heap of stones was called Galeed (heap of witness),
and Mizpah (watch tower), because Laban had said that Jehovah should be
guardian if they were separated one from the other.

And Jacob sent messengers before him to appease his brother Esau, to
Mount Seir, with 200 ewes, and 20 rams, and 200 she-goats, and 20
he-goats, and 30 camels with their colts, and 40 cows, and 10 bulls, and
20 she-asses, and 10 asses, as a gift to Esau; and he divided his flocks
into two parts, that the one might escape, if Esau came against the
other; for he was sore afraid. He rose in the night and took his two
wives, and his two maids, and his eleven children, and carried them
through the ford of the Jabbok, but he himself remained behind. Then a
man wrestled with him till the morning broke, and smote the socket of
his hip, and Jacob's hip was out of joint. And he said: "Let me go, for
the morning is breaking." But Jacob said: "I will not let thee go, till
thou blessest me." Then he said: "Thy name shall be Jacob no longer, but
Israel; for thou hast striven with God, and with men, and hast
overcome," and he blessed him there. And Jacob named the place Peniel
(God's visage), and the sun arose as he passed beyond Peniel.

Jacob lifted up his eyes, and lo! Esau came, and with him four hundred
men. Then Jacob assigned his children to Leah and Rachel and the two
maids, and the maids and their children he put in the front, and next
Leah and her children, and last of all Rachel with her son. He went
before them and bowed himself seven times before his brother. But Esau
embraced him, and kissed him, and they wept. The present of cattle Esau
would not accept. "I have enough, my brother," he said, "keep what is
thine." But Jacob urged him to take them as a proof that he had found
grace in his eyes. Then Esau took them and parted in peace from his
brother, and on the same day turned back on his way to Mount Seir. But
Jacob went to Shechem, and bought the field where he had pitched his
tent, and there set up an altar; and from Shechem he went to Bethel, and
there also he built an altar; and from Bethel Jacob returned to Hebron
to his father Isaac.

As we have seen, the Arabs and Phenicians believed that the power and
might of the gods was present in certain stones, which they worshipped
in their sanctuaries (pp. 329, 360). The Hebrews also were acquainted
with this worship. The first text tells us that God appeared to Jacob
when he returned out of Mesopotamia, that He blessed him, and said:
Henceforth Israel shall be thy name. And God went up from the place
where he had spoken with him, and Jacob set up a stone as a sign on the
place, and poured oil on it, and called the name of the place Bethel
(house of God).[595] In the older mode of conception, the stone was
itself the house of God. The Ephraimitic text represents Jacob as
resting on the stone when he went to Mesopotamia, and as seeing in a
dream the ladder on which the angels went up and down;[596] the
appearance of Jehovah at the top of the ladder, as well as the form of
the blessing, belongs to the revision.[597] The change of the name Jacob
into Israel is referred by the Ephraimitic text to a definite occasion.
To the Hebrews, in the old time, the god of their tribe was a jealous
and fearful deity, averse to the life of nature,--a god who exercised
dominion above in the highest heaven, who rode on the clouds, and
announced himself in thunder and lightning, and earthquakes, who
appeared in flames of fire, whom the eye of mortal man could not behold
and live.[598] The supernatural God can in the first instance be
conceived and regarded only in contrast to nature, and the life of
nature. But inasmuch as the natural life can only come into being and
continue to exist by his permission, and with his consent, that life
must be redeemed and purchased. Hence according to the primitive
conception of the Hebrews, everything that was brought to the birth
belonged to their god, the firstlings of the field, and of beast, the
first-born male of the woman. Abraham was ready to sacrifice the
firstborn son of his wife, the son of his own heart. But he was not
permitted to slay him. He had already offered the sacrifice, inasmuch as
he was resolved to sacrifice what was dearest, in obedience to the
bidding of God. So runs the Ephraimitic text. As Jacob was returning
from the Euphrates he came upon a place in Gilead, known as "God's
visage." Here, in the dark of the night, a man wrestled with Jacob till
the morning broke, and Jacob would not let him go till he had blessed
him; "Thou hast striven with God and men, and overcome; therefore,
henceforth thy name shall be Israel."[599] In the myth of the
Phenicians, the power of destruction is taken from the hostile god, when
the friendly god wrestles with him. The Hebrews changed the wrestling
between the hostile and friendly deities, into a wrestling between the
servant and the master, between the patriarch of the tribe and his god,
a struggle from which the former does not let the god go till he has
obtained a pledge, that he will spare him and his tribe, and send
increase and blessing to him and his tribe. The contrast of hostile and
friendly deities, and their struggle with each other, the Hebrew
conceives as the work, the toil, the struggle of men, _i.e._ strenuous
wrestling to win the blessing of God. Jacob carried away the injury to
his thigh, but he won the blessing of Jehovah.

With this conception of the Hebrews, that the First-born belonged to
Jehovah, is connected the ordinance that a ransom must be offered for
him. Moreover, in every spring the Paschal lamb was offered as a
sin-offering for the redemption of the house, along with the firstlings
of the field. The use of circumcision also, as it seems, stood with the
Hebrews in close connection with the idea that the life of boys must be
ransomed by a bloody sacrifice. Jehovah is said to have commanded
Abraham to circumcise his family in token of the covenant which he had
made with him and his seed (p. 392). This custom was also in use among
the Edomites and certain other Arabian and Syrian tribes.[600]

According to the genealogy of the Hebrews we had to assume that the
Semitic tribes from Arphaxad first went to Serug, and afterwards to Ur
in Chaldæa; and that these immigrants, or a branch of them, passed from
Ur to Haran. While the Nahorites remained behind at Haran, the
Abrahamites turned towards the southern border of Canaan, where the
Ammonites and Moabites, the Ishmaelites and Midianites, separated, and
took possession of the centre of Arabia, the peninsula of Sinai, and the
land eastward of the Jordan. From the narrative of Isaac, Esau, and
Jacob, it further follows that not only those nations but also the sons
of Esau, the Edomites, were descendants of Abraham, and the Hebrews were
a branch of the Edomites who had separated from them. Hence the Hebrews
were the youngest scion of the stock which once came from the mountains
of Arphaxad to Ur, to Mesopotamia, and then into the deserts of Arabia
and Syria. If, however, we allow that the genealogies of the Hebrews
express the position which they took up or wished to take up towards the
kindred Semitic nations, the Assyrians, Babylonians, Mesopotamians, the
Arabians, Midianites, Moabites, and Ammonites, and did not attempt to
place facts of history beyond doubt, yet we must not refuse to recognise
a definite historical basis in the relation of the Hebrews to the
Edomites. The Edomites possessed Mount Seir, which runs from the
southern extremity of the Dead Sea to the north-east corner of the Red
Sea. Before them the Horites possessed this mountain (p. 403).[601]
According to the Hebrew tradition the patriarch of the Edomites was
Esau. He "was red in colour and hairy." Though this is not the meaning
of the name Esau, the name Edomites does actually mean the "red people,"
and the name of their mountain Seir means, "to be hairy," a name which
could very well be given to a mountain covered with briars and
brushwood. The Edomites were fond of the chase and of war; their
progenitor is a hunter and warrior; and to this, his eldest son, Isaac
foretells that his dwelling should be without the fatness of the earth;
by his sword should he live. Only a slight advantage in age is allowed
to Esau: he is merely the firstborn of twins; and even at birth his
brother Jacob held him by the heel. The pre-eminence which Isaac gives
to the younger son is explained in the Judæan text merely by the fact,
that Esau had taken wives from the Hittites. "And when Esau saw that
Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him to Mesopotamia in order to take a
wife from thence, Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan displeased his
father, and he went to Ishmael, and took Mahalath, the daughter of
Ishmael, the son of Abraham, the sister of Nebajoth, to wife to his
other wives."[602] All the further details of the relations between the
two brothers, the sale of the birthright, the obtaining of the blessing,
and the form of the blessing, belong to the revision. This text and this
only could make Isaac say to Esau, "Thou shalt serve thy brother, but
shalt break his yoke from off thy neck." Saul conquered, and David
subjugated the Edomites; it was not till the time of Joram, king of
Judah, in the first half of the ninth century B.C., that they recovered
their independence.

The description of the journey of Jacob to the Euphrates, his service
with Laban, and his flight, come from the Ephraimitic text: the revision
has only extended the introduction, and here and there inserted an
interpolation. To the same text belongs the peaceful departure from the
Nahorites, the setting up of a token on the east of Jordan to fix how
far the borders of the Israelites, beyond which the Nahorites were not
to go, were to extend in this direction, and finally Jacob's
reconciliation with Esau. With the daughters of Canaan whom he took to
wife, Esau could only beget an impure race, and even with the daughter
of Ishmael his race would not be wholly pure, while Jacob served
patiently for fourteen years in order to obtain wives of the genuine
blood. By this, and by the blessing of Isaac, the pre-eminence of the
younger Israelites is established over the Edomites; but the brothers
parted in peace. Esau received rich gifts. Thus they separated on the
ford of the Jabbok at the sacred place of Peniel. The one went to Seir,
the other to Shechem in Canaan. Hence the Edomites had no reason to
cherish resentment against the sons of Jacob.

Isaac and Jacob abode in Canaan at Hebron, Beersheba, and Shechem. Here
Isaac again dug out the wells which Abraham's servants had previously
made. The quarrel of his servants about the wells with the Philistines
of Gerar is based on the severe battles afterwards fought between the
Philistines and Israel. As Abraham had set up pillars, so does Isaac
build an altar at Beersheba,[603] and Jacob sets up a sacred stone at
Bethel. As Abraham, according to the first text, buys the burying-place
at Hebron, so Jacob, according to this same text, bought the field at
Shechem, where he had pitched his tent. Thus Isaac and Jacob also have
acquired possessions in Canaan, and have rendered services to the land;
they also have prepared the way for the rule of their descendants in
Canaan, and have consecrated the places at which the Hebrews were
destined to worship the gods of their fathers.

The three patriarchs strictly carry out the commands of Jehovah, from
which their descendants swerved often and long. To the Hebrews they are
patterns of the purity of their race; their descendants did not always
keep themselves free from mixture with the Canaanites. But they are not
only patterns of the fear of God, and piety, of correct faith and right
dealing with the Canaanites; they also exhibit to the Hebrews the moral
ideal of their conduct. Abraham is distinguished by the virtues of
faithfulness, of unselfishness, and friendliness to his brother's
family, and, in return, the blessing of Jehovah rests upon him. Other
virtues are brought into prominence by the tradition in Jacob, the most
immediate ancestor of the Hebrews. If Abraham knew how to raise the
sword, and Esau lived a wild hunter's life, Jacob is a peaceable,
faithful shepherd, who patiently endures heat and cold, who is ever wide
awake, under whose hand the flocks increase, and whose care prevents the
sheep and goats from casting their young. When Jacob had served fourteen
years for his wives, he still continued to serve six years for hire.
Among the Hebrews the life of a hired servant is not considered a
degradation; and continuance in service for the sake of hire is not
looked down upon with contempt. Jehovah rewards the industrious
servant, the active workman. With his staff in his hand Jacob passed
over the Euphrates; but he returned rich in flocks and goods, blessed
with wife and child. In his pliancy, his quiet, peaceful trust in God,
his wrestling for the blessing of God, Jacob is the genuine warrior of
God (Israel), who is rescued, and gains the victory. Beside these stand
realistic traits peculiar to the East and the Hebrew character. Jacob is
a cunning man, who knows how to invent clever devices. With the help of
his mother he gains from his brother the blessing of the firstborn. At
first Laban outwits him, but in the end Jacob's cunning is victorious.
He knows how to pacify his brother by subjection. To bow before the
mighty in order to save property and life has not always appeared
dishonourable to the Oriental.

FOOTNOTES:

[568] Numbers xxi. 27; Joshua x. 14; Genesis xlviii. 20, 22. In proof
that Genesis xlix. belongs to the time of the judges, cf. Ewald, "Gesch.
Israel's," 1, 91.

[569] Gen. xxxvi. 1; xlvi. 8 ff.; Exod. vi. 14 ff.; Numb. iii. 17-21;
xxvii. 33.

[570] Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 64.

[571] Numb. xxi. 14.

[572] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 273.

[573] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 316, 317.

[574] Dillmann-Knobel, "Genesis," s. 11.

[575] Gen. x. 14; Exod. xv. 1-11; Numb. xxi. 14-18; cf. De
Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 319.

[576] De Wette-Schrader, _loc. cit._ s. 318.

[577] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," 320, 321.

[578] Chap. iv., 44--c. xxviii, 69.

[579] De Wette-Schrader, _loc. cit._ s. 303 ff.

[580] Gen. xi. 1-9.

[581] Gen. xi. 10-32.

[582] Ezek. xxiii. 15; Deut. xxvi. 25; Joshua xxiv. 2.

[583] These are the numbers in the Hebrew text; in the Samaritan and
Septuagint they are altered.--Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 112. To the
first text, chap, ii., 4-24 and iii., were added by the reviser; he
inserted another genealogical table below the series of patriarchs in
the original text from Adam to Noah (iv. 17 ff), and this table does not
run like the first: Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch,
Methusalah, Lamech, Noah, but gives the following order: (Enos) Adam,
Cain, Enoch, Irad, Mahajael, Methusael, Lamech. To Lamech this narrator
attached the origin of the shepherds, players on instruments, and
workers in brass. Bunsen ("Ægypten," 5, 2, 62 ff), has drawn from this
the conclusion that the Hebrews had really only seven patriarchs before
the flood.

[584] Ptolemy. 6, 1.

[585] Kiepert, "Monatsberichte der Berl. Akademie," 1859, s. 200.

[586] Stephan. Byz. s. v. from Arrian; Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 16.

[587] Buttmann, "Mythol." 1, 235; Procop. "De Bell. P." 1, 17; Ewald,
"Gesch. der V. Israel," 1, 358, 380; Bunsen, "Ægypten," 4, 450.

[588] The narrative of Hagar (Gen. xvi.) belongs to the first text; the
additions to the revision; the account of the expulsion of Ishmael (Gen.
xxi.) is from the Ephraimitic text.

[589] Gen. xiii. 5, 11, 12; xix. 29.

[590] Gen. xvii.

[591] Gen. xiv. De Wette-Schrader thinks the derivation from a written
source probable ("Einleitung," s. 319).

[592] Gen. ix. 20-27; Schrader, "Studien und Kritiken," s. 166 ff.

[593] Gen. xxv. 19.

[594] Dillmann-Knobel, "Genesis," p. 313.

[595] Gen. xxxv. 9-15.

[596] Gen. xxviii. 11, 12, 17-22.

[597] Gen. xxviii. 13-16.

[598] Exod. xxiv. 17, "And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like
devouring fire." Exod. xix. 16, 18, "There were thunders and lightnings,
and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding
loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And mount
Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in
fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the
whole mount quaked greatly." Exod. xl. 38, "For the cloud of the Lord
was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night;" cf.
Numbers ix. 15, 16. Deut. iv. 15, "On the day that the Lord spake unto
you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire." Job i. 16, "The fire of God
is fallen from heaven and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants,
and consumed them." Numb. xvi. 35, "And there came out a fire from the
Lord and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense."
Lev. x. 2, "And there went out a fire from the Lord and devoured them,
and they died before the Lord." Exod. xxxiii. 3, "I will not go up in
the midst of thee lest I consume thee in the way." Exod. xxxiii. 20,
"Thou canst not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live."
Deut. v. 26, "Who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of
the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and
lived." Lev. xvi. 2, "Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at
all times into the holy place ... that he die not." Exod. xix. 21,
"Charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and
many of them perish." Exod. xx. 19, "Let not God speak with us, lest we
die." Judges xiii. 22, "We shall surely die, because we have seen God."
1 Sam. vi. 19, "And he smote the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had
looked into the ark of the Lord."

[599] Gen. xxxii. 24-32.

[600] Exod. iv. 24; xii. 1-18; xiii. 2, 12-14; xxxiv. 19; xxx. 11-16.
From the sacrifice of Isaac, the redemption of the firstborn and the
Paschal offering, the conclusion may be drawn that in the oldest times
human sacrifices were not unknown to the Hebrews. If such took place
they were not offered in the same manner as the Moloch-offerings of the
Canaanites. If Jehovah appears in fire, the fire is not, to the Hebrews,
his essence, but only a form or mode of appearance. Sacrifices like
those offered to Moloch were forbidden by the earliest text (Levit.
xviii. 22; xx. 2) under pain of death. The narrative of Jephthah's
daughter lays especial stress on the sanctity of the vow. Of the other
passages which come into consideration only one or two deal with
sacrifices; the remainder have reference to executions. In Numbers xxv.
4, we find, "Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before
the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be
turned away from Israel." Jephthah vowed his daughter and sacrificed
her, Judges xi. 30, 34. "And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord
in Gilgal," 1 Samuel xv. 33. In 2 Samuel xxi. 6-9, the Gibeonites say,
"Give us seven men of his sons that we may hang them before the Lord in
Gibeah. And they hanged them up on the mountain before Jehovah."

[601] Gen. xiv. 6; Deut. ii. 12, 22.

[602] Gen. xxviii. 1-9; Gen. xxxvi. 3, 10, calls the daughter of
Ishmael, Basmath; cf. _supra_, pp. 317, 406.

[603] Gen. xlviii. 1. On the places of worship at Beersheba and the
"heights of Isaac" in Amos, cf. A. Bernstein, "Ursprung der Sagen," s.
14, 15.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE HEBREWS IN EGYPT.


When the progenitors of the Hebrews had come from the Euphrates to
Canaan, and had taken up their abode there at Hebron and Shechem, when
Jacob and Esau had parted in peace, and the latter had gone to Mount
Seir, Jacob, with all his sons, went to Egypt.

Jacob dwelt at Hebron--so runs the narrative--when he sent Joseph, the
son of Rachel, to his elder brethren in Shechem, to see if all was well
with them and their flocks. But his brethren hated Joseph, because his
father loved him more than them; and when they saw him coming, they
said: We will slay him. But the eldest, Reuben, said: Shed no blood, but
throw him into the pit yonder. This they did; they took from Joseph the
coat which his father had made for him, and thrust him into the pit.
Then there came a caravan of Ishmaelites from Gilead; their camels
carried spices, balsam, and myrrh to Egypt. And his brethren took Joseph
again out of the pit, and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty shekels
of silver. Then they slew a goat, and dipped the coat in the blood, and
brought it to their father. Jacob knew the coat, and cried: An evil
beast has eaten my son, and torn his garments; and he would not be
comforted, but said: In sorrow will I go down to the grave to my son.
But Joseph was carried away to Egypt, and was bought by Potiphar, an
Egyptian in the service of the king, and captain of the body-guard, from
the Ishmaelites. Joseph found grace in the eyes of his master; and as
everything which he undertook prospered, Potiphar set him over his
house. Joseph was goodly to look upon, and the wife of his master cast
her eyes upon him. But he resisted her, and when she caught him by his
garment, he left his garment in her hand, and fled out. Then she kept
Joseph's garment by her till Potiphar returned, and said to him: The
Hebrew servant, whom thou has brought to us, came to me to mock me; and
when I lifted up my voice, he fled away and left his garment. Then
Potiphar was angry, and took Joseph and cast him into the house of
bondage, where were the prisoners of the king. And it came to pass that
the chief butler and the chief baker sinned against the king, and
Pharaoh put them in prison. Each of these had a dream in the night, and
Joseph interpreted the dreams; and it came to pass, as he foretold, that
the chief baker was hanged, but the chief butler was restored by Pharaoh
to his office, on his birthday, so that, as before, he gave the cup into
his hand. Two years afterwards, the king of Egypt saw in a dream seven
fat kine come up out of the Nile, and after them seven lean kine, and
the lean kine ate up the fat. As none of the interpreters and wise men
of Egypt could interpret this dream, the chief butler bethought him of
the young man of the tribe of the Hebrews, who had interpreted his own
dream in the prison, and told Pharaoh what had befallen him. Then
Pharaoh sent, and Joseph was quickly brought out of prison, and shaved
himself, changed his garments, and came before Pharaoh and said: Seven
years of abundance will come in the land of Egypt, and after them seven
years of famine. Let Pharaoh collect food in the good years, and gather
together corn, and keep it against the years of famine, that the land be
not destroyed. Then Pharaoh took his ring from his hand and placed it on
the hand of Joseph, and clothed him in garments of linen, and placed a
golden chain upon his neck, and said: I place thee over the whole land
of Egypt, only by my throne will I be above thee. And Pharaoh called
Joseph Zaphnath-paaneah, and gave him Asenath, the daughter of the
priest at On, to wife, and caused him to ride in his second chariot, and
the people cried before him: Bow the knee. When the seven years of
abundance came, Joseph collected food, and gathered up corn in the
cities, without number, as the sand of the sea. And when the years of
famine came, there was no bread in the land, and the people were
compelled to buy bread from the granaries of Pharaoh; and when their
money failed, they brought their horses, cattle, sheep, and asses to buy
food from Joseph, and all the cattle in the land came to the king. And
when they had no cattle left to buy corn, they gave their land and
fields. Thus Joseph bought the land for Pharaoh, and the country became
Pharaoh's, and Joseph said: Here is seed for you; sow your fields, and
at the time of harvest, give the fifth to Pharaoh, and four parts shall
be your own for food, for yourselves and your children, and those in
your houses. Thus Joseph laid on the land of the Egyptians a tax of the
fifth, until this day.

The famine was sore in all lands, and in the land of Canaan, and when
Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, he said to his sons: Go down
and buy for us there, that we die not. Then the brethren of Joseph went
down; but Benjamin, whom Rachel had borne after Joseph, Jacob sent not
with them, for he feared that some evil might happen to him. Joseph, who
sold corn to the people, knew his brethren when they bowed themselves to
the earth before him, and remembered how he once dreamed at Hebron that
he was binding sheaves with his brethren in the field, and his sheaf
stood upright, and the sheaves of his brethren bowed before it; and that
the sun, moon, and eleven stars bowed before him. The interpreter was
between them, and he dealt roughly with his brethren, and said: Ye are
spies, who are come to see the weakness of the land. No, my lord, they
answered, we are true men, twelve brethren, the sons of one father in
the land of Canaan. The youngest has remained with our father, and one
is not. Then Joseph took Simeon, and bound him and said: Take corn for
the need of your house, and then bring your youngest brother with you,
that I may see that ye are not spies; then will I give you back your
brother, and ye shall deal in our land.

When Jacob heard this, he said to his sons: Ye make me childless; Joseph
is no more, and Simeon is no more, and Benjamin ye would take from me.
All these things are against me. But when the corn was eaten which they
brought out of Egypt, he sent his sons a second time to buy food; and
Benjamin was with them. Judah had promised his father to be surety for
him. Joseph caused them to be brought into his house, and gave them
water to wash their feet, and food for their asses, and restored Simeon
to them, and bade them eat at his table. And food was placed for the
brethren by themselves, and for Joseph and the Egyptians by themselves.
And Joseph caused presents to be given to them, and Benjamin's present
was the largest; and they were drunken in his house. Then Joseph caused
his steward to fill the sacks of the strangers with corn, and to replace
the purchase money in each sack, and in Benjamin's sack to place his own
cup of silver. When the morning came, and the brethren went forth from
the city with their sacks and their asses, Joseph's steward overtook
them not far from the city, and demanded the silver and gold which they
had stolen, and found the cup in Benjamin's sack. The brethren rent
their garments and turned back, and cast themselves on the earth before
Joseph. But he said: With whomsoever the cup was found he shall be my
servant; the rest may go in peace. Then Judah came forward and said:
When we set forth our father said, If ye take Benjamin also from me, and
any evil happen to him, ye will bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the
grave. If then we go back to our father, thy servant, and the boy is not
with us, he will die, for his soul hangs upon him; let me remain here in
his place, and be thy servant, that I may not see the sorrow of my
father. Then Joseph could no longer restrain himself: he caused the
Egyptians to go out from his presence, and lifted up his voice with
tears, and said: I am Joseph, your brother, whom ye sold. Hasten, and go
to my father, and tell him of all my glory. Bid him come to me, and you
shall dwell here with your possessions. But Jacob did not believe the
words of his sons, till he saw the chariots which Pharaoh had sent to
carry him to Egypt. And Jacob set out with his sons, their wives and
their children, seventy souls, with his flocks, and his goods, to Egypt;
and Joseph came to meet him in his chariot, and wept long on the neck of
his father, and gave to his kindred food, and a dwelling-place in the
land of Goshen. When Jacob's days came to a close, he called his son
Joseph, and said to him: Thy two sons, born to thee in the land of
Egypt, shall be mine; Ephraim and Manasseh shall be to me as Reuben and
Simeon. And he laid his right hand on Ephraim, and named Ephraim the
younger before Manasseh, and said: In thee shall Israel bless and say:
God make thee like Ephraim and Manasseh. And thus Jacob blessed his
other sons also, and to Judah he said: The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, nor the staff of the ruler from between his feet; he shall bind
his ass to the vine, and the colt of his she-ass to the choice vine; he
shall wash his garment in wine, and his robe in the blood of the grape;
his eyes are red with wine, and his teeth white with milk. But Joseph is
the son of a fruit-tree by a well. The branches ran over the wall; the
archers provoke and follow him, but his bow remains firm, and the
strength of his hands is supple. So he blessed them, and said to Joseph:
Bury me not in Egypt; bury me with my fathers in the cave which Abraham
bought of Ephron the Hittite, where Abraham, and Sarah, and Isaac, and
Rebekah are buried, and where I buried Leah. Then Joseph fell on the
face of his father and wept, and the Egyptians mourned seventy days for
Jacob, and Joseph carried the body with Pharaoh's servants, and the
elders of Pharaoh's house and of all Egypt, and with all his brethren,
and the whole house of Jacob to Canaan, and buried him in the cave of
Machpelah. But Joseph dwelt in Egypt till his death, and he saw the sons
of Ephraim till the third generation, and the sons of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, were born on his knees. Joseph died 110 years old, and they
embalmed him, and placed him in a sepulchre in Egypt. And all Joseph's
brethren died. But their sons were fruitful and increased, and the land
was full of them.

Then there arose a new king in Egypt who knew not Joseph, and he said:
The children of Israel are mighty; we shall be wise to prevent their
increase, that they join not with our enemies if a war arise. And the
Egyptians put taskmasters over the children of Israel, in order to
oppress them with burdens. The children of Israel were compelled to
perform heavy tasks in the field, and taskwork in clay and bricks; and
they built for Pharaoh the treasure cities of Pithom and Ramses, and
Pharaoh commanded all his people to throw into the Nile all the male
children born to the Israelites, but to let the daughters live.

It is no longer possible to discover what motives were given in the
Judæan text for the settlement of Jacob and his sons in Egypt. In it the
land thus apportioned to the Hebrews is not called Goshen, but Ramses.
Yet it is clear that even in that account it was Joseph who procured a
habitation and possessions for his father and brethren in Egypt.[604]
The reasons given for the change in the narrative, as it now stands, are
taken from the Ephraimitic text, which describes in the most lively
manner, the virtues and glory of the ancestor of this tribe. The
prophetic revision only added a few details, and sharpened a few of the
traits. The second text represented Joseph as falling into the hands of
Midianite merchants, the revision added Ishmaelites. According to the
second text, Joseph was a servant in the house of Potiphar, in whose
house as captain of the body-guard the butler and baker of Pharaoh were
imprisoned, and there Joseph interpreted their dreams. The revision
inserts the temptation of Joseph by Potiphar's wife, and makes him,
owing to her false accusation, a fellow-prisoner of the butler and
baker.[605] Thus it was able to exalt Joseph, not from servitude only,
but from the misery of imprisonment to the steps of the throne.

The ethical traits of the narrative, the national and religious views
underlying it, are obvious. The evil of which his brothers are guilty
towards Joseph, without any offence on his part, he bears with
submission. In the service of the Egyptian he shows himself a faithful
slave; he withstands the most enticing temptation. In return for this
faithful honesty he is compelled again to suffer innocently. After long
endurance he receives the highest exaltation; from prison he is summoned
to be ruler of the land, and second only to Pharaoh. As he had been a
faithful steward to Potiphar in small things, he is now a faithful
servant to Pharaoh in great things; all the events, which he correctly
foresaw, he knew how to turn to the advantage of his master. When he has
shown his brothers, in order to touch their consciences for the evil
they had done to him, how men may innocently fall into suspicion,
punishment, and misfortune, he generously pardons them. In this pardon,
this rescue of the whole tribe by the man whom they had attempted to
destroy, rests the true punishment laid upon the brothers. It is the
wonderful guidance of Jehovah which assists the innocent out of misery
and distress, which turns the evil, which the brothers had committed
against Joseph, in such a direction that in the grievous years of famine
the race of Jacob finds a helper and protector near the throne of Egypt,
who is able to give food and a habitation to that tribe, and allot to
their flocks the magnificent pastures of the land of Goshen. The
carrying of the corpse of Jacob to Hebron is intended to signify that
Canaan, and not Egypt, was to be the lasting abode of the posterity of
Jacob. At the same time the tradition of the Hebrews shows the benefits
which a man of their race conferred upon the Egyptians in a time of
evil; it marks how Egypt, owing to his foresight, was saved from
destruction, in order at the same time to show how little the Egyptians
regarded these benefits, and how great is the contrast presented by
their subsequent conduct towards the Hebrews.

The description of Egypt corresponds exactly to the circumstances of the
land as we have found them before. Both the author of the Ephraimitic
text and the reviser were well acquainted with the life and customs of
Egypt. We have found captains of the body guard in the retinue of
Pharaoh (p. 190), a chief baker is also to be seen on the monuments, and
although we cannot point to any butler of the king upon them, we know
that in Egypt wine was not wanting at the table of Pharaoh, any more
than among his workmen.[606] In the whole of the East, and demonstrably
in Egypt, great importance was attached to dreams.[607] By knowing how
to explain their meaning more correctly than the wise men and
interpreters of Egypt--_i.e._ than the prophets, and temple-scribes of
the Egyptian priesthood[608]--Joseph is liberated from prison, and
raised to the position of grand vizier. The robes of byssus, in which
Joseph is now clad, we have found to be the prescribed dress of the
priests (p. 197), and if Pharaoh puts a golden chain round his neck, we
have already met with an instance of this kind of distinction (p. 131).
That the Pharaohs regarded themselves as proprietors of the soil, that
they collected a land-tax, and that the fields would require to be
measured in order to collect this tax, has been already stated (p. 194).
This tax, so surprising to them, the Hebrews explained by assuming that
the Egyptians sold their plots to Joseph in the time of the famine,
which were then given back to the proprietors in return for a fifth of
the yearly produce. Hereby the services of Joseph to the throne are
placed in the clearest light. We saw above that it was the first object
of Pharaoh and his ministers to provide Egypt with life and sustenance
(pp. 104, 184). Joseph's wisdom and providence put Pharaoh in a position
to attain this object, even in the years of the famine. The names also
quoted in the Hebrew narrative seem to correspond to the ancient
Egyptian. The name Potiphar may be explained by Petphra, _i.e._
"dedicated to Ra," or by Puti-phra, _i.e._ "given by Ra." The name of
the daughter of the priest at On (Heliopolis), Asenath, whom Joseph took
to wife, can be explained by As-neith, and the Egyptian name of Joseph,
Zaphnath-paaneah, by Zpentpouch, _i.e._ "creator of life" (in the time
of famine).[609]

Setting aside these points in the narrative, what historical value can
be given to the tradition that the children of Jacob went from the south
of Canaan to the east of Egypt, that they remained there 430 years,
according to the older text, and in this period increased into a mighty
people?[610] The district given to the children of Jacob for their abode
lies, as the tradition plainly shows, in the lower country east of the
Nile, beyond the Eastern or Tanitic mouth. The name Goshen, given in the
Ephraimitic text, appears to correspond to Keshem, the name of a
province in Lower Egypt.[611] The chain of mountains running on the east
of the Nile, sinks down between the Tanitic arm and the north-west
corner of the Arabian Gulf, and on the slopes nearer the river presents
a flat extent of pasture land. In Egypt a tribe of shepherds could have
no share in the regular system of cultivation, and the fixed order of
Egyptian life; a district suitable for the maintenance of their flocks
would be allotted to them, and nothing more. On the north of this
district, the nearest of the great cities of Egypt was Tanis (Zoan), on
the south, Heliopolis (On, Anu), with which we have become acquainted as
a great centre of religion, and the seat of the worship of the sun god
Ra, and the god of life Bennu-Osiris (pp. 44, 69). Hence with perfect
consistency, the Hebrew tradition narrates that the daughter of a priest
of Heliopolis was given to Joseph to wife.

But what could induce the children of Jacob to go to Egypt, or the
Egyptians to give them a pasture-land on their north-eastern border? We
arrived above at the conclusion that the tribe of Jacob was a branch of
the Edomites, whose dwelling-place is fixed by tradition in the
mountains between the north-east point of the Arabian Gulf and the Dead
Sea, where in fact we find them in historical times. This tribe,
therefore, both at the time when in union with the Edomites it passed
along the eastern and southern borders of Canaan, and after separating
from the Edomites--who may have already taken Mount Seir from the
Horites, or have pastured their flocks in the vicinity--was at no great
distance from Egypt. When divided from the Edomites, the fear of the
stronger part of the tribe from which they had separated, and the desire
to find more fruitful pastures in the neighbourhood of the Nile, or want
of corn, as the tradition says, might have induced the sons of Jacob to
leave the borders of Canaan for the borders of Egypt. The tribes, or
families of shepherds, who pastured their flocks in the neighbourhood of
Canaan, may have been accustomed to purchase corn when their own
cultivation was insufficient, from the corn-growers in Canaan. A blight
in Canaan would therefore compel them to turn to the abundance of corn
in Egypt. And to a shepherd tribe, which sought her protection, and
submitted voluntarily to her rule, Egypt would be the more inclined to
give up the pastures beyond the Nile, if this tribe was in unfriendly or
hostile relations to the Semitic tribes in the neighbourhood.

If we attempt to fix the date at which the tribe of Jacob may have
exchanged the pastures on the border of Canaan for the more fruitful
regions on the Tanitic arm of the Nile, it soon becomes clear that the
accounts of the Hebrews cannot be maintained. The older text puts 215
years between the time when Abraham entered Canaan and the arrival of
the sons of Jacob into Egypt, and exactly twice this amount between
their arrival in and exodus from Egypt. The fixed proportion between the
two numbers, and the further circumstance that tradition can only
mention a few generations of the sons of Jacob,[612] leads to the
conclusion that those numbers do not spring from any record or actual
remembrance, but have been invented upon reflection. The date of the
exodus also is fixed by a round sum; from the exodus to the building of
the temple 480 years are said to have elapsed.[613] The Hebrews reckoned
40 years to the generation; hence they put twelve generations between
the exodus and the building of the temple, and fixed the interval on
this computation; yet their scriptures could only mention by name nine
or ten generations in this period.[614] Hence the dates 2140 B.C., and
1925 B.C., which are deduced from the older text for the entrance of
Abraham into Canaan, and of Jacob into Egypt, if the beginning of the
building of the temple is fixed according to traditional assumption in
the year 1015 B.C., must be given up, as well as the year 2115 B.C. for
the entrance of Abraham into Canaan, and the year 1900 B.C. for the
settlement of Jacob in Egypt, which results from the fixing the
beginning of the building of the temple in the year 990 B.C. The only
fact in the ancient tradition which admits of an approximate date is the
campaign of Kudur-Lagamer of Elam, mentioned in the Ephraimitic text.
This campaign we ventured to place about the year 2000 B.C. Genesis
represents him as defeating the nations on the east and south of Canaan,
and the Horites on Mount Seir, while at the separation of Esau and Jacob
Mount Seir is no longer the abode of the Horites, but of the tribe of
Esau. But we must contest the claim of tradition to bring the history of
Abraham into connection with this campaign of the Elamites to the west.
On the other hand we may regard it as settled that the tribe of Jacob
did not arrive in Egypt at the time when the valley of the Nile was
under the dominion of the Hyksos, _i.e._ in the period from 2101 B.C. to
1591 B.C., which we have assumed for this dominion, and that during this
time it did not dwell in Egypt. The tradition of the Hebrews was not
likely to forget that their ancestors came to the Nile, not as
fugitives, but as kinsmen of the ruler of Egypt, or that their race had
once shared in the rule over Egypt, and thus they might have dropped the
slavery and imprisonment, and the position of Joseph in Pharaoh's
service. And if these grounds are not held to be sufficient--if the
tribe of Jacob was in Egypt under the dominion of the Hyksos, it must
have been involved in their overthrow and expulsion.

Thus it may be assumed as proved that the admission of the sons of Jacob
into Egypt did not take place till after the complete expulsion of the
Hyksos, _i.e._ till Tuthmosis III. had forced the shepherds to leave the
region to which they were at last confined, _i.e._ till after the year
1591 B.C. And it can hardly have taken place immediately after this
event. We cannot suppose any inclination among the Egyptians,
immediately after the expulsion of foreign shepherd tribes, to admit
shepherds of the same nationality to the Nile. But when Tuthmosis III.
had carried his weapons as far as the Euphrates, and received yearly
tribute from the Syrians, the Cheta, and the Retennu, there would be no
scruples felt about allotting pastures on the edge of the desert to an
inconsiderable shepherd tribe. Hence the settlement of the sons of Jacob
in Goshen may be placed about the middle of the sixteenth century B.C.

The tradition of the Hebrews informed us that their ancestors were
compelled to build the two treasure-cities Pithom and Ramses for
Pharaoh. This statement is in the Ephraimitic text, while the Judæan
text calls the land given to the Hebrews Ramses.[615] The ruins of
Pithom and of Ramses we found on the canal which Sethos I. and Ramses
II. intended to carry from the Nile at Bubastis into the Arabian Gulf,
and which was completed as far as the Lake of Crocodiles (p. 157). The
depression of the Wadi Tumilat, which the canal followed, crosses the
land of Goshen. Cities could not be founded here till the canal from the
Nile had provided water in sufficient quantity. A city of the name of
Pa-Rameses, _i.e._ abode of Ramses, could only be founded by a prince of
that name. Being situated on the canal of Ramses II. and further to the
east than Pithom, the city could only have been built by the prince
whose reign we have placed from 1388 B.C. to 1322 B.C. As a fact his
image is found here on a block of granite in the ruins between the gods
Ra and Tum, and the bricks in the remains of the outer walls are mixed
with cut straw, the use of which in moulding the bricks for these
buildings is mentioned by the revision.[616] This city of Ramses must
have been of considerable importance for the district allotted to the
Hebrews, as the whole region was called after it. Hence the sons of
Jacob were in the land of Goshen in the reign of Ramses II. The
tradition allows them to remain unmolested in Egypt for a long
time--"not till the land was full of them," so runs the older text,
without ascribing any other motive, "did the Egyptians force the
children of Israel to work in clay and brick, and in the fields."[617]
In the former class of works comes the building of these two cities.
Hence the Israelites must have reached Goshen before the time of Ramses
II.

The desired evidence of the presence of the children of Jacob in Egypt
could be obtained from Egyptian writings and monuments if it were
certain that a name used in them referred to the Hebrews. On a hieratic
papyrus (now at Leyden) an officer intreats his superiors to give him
corn "for the soldiers and the Apuriuu who drag stones to the great
fortress of the house of Ramses, beloved of Ammon," _i.e._ king Ramses
II.[618] In other places in the same papyrus the name occurs as Apruu.
Another papyrus observes under date of Ramses III. (p. 163)--"2083 Apruu
at this place" _i.e._ at Heliopolis.[619] In an inscription in the
quarries at Hamamat it is said that 800 Apuriu or Apriu are mentioned as
workmen.[620] But is the Egyptian name of the Hebrews really Apru or
Apuriu? The wife of Potiphar, it is true, calls Joseph "the Hebrew
servant" (p. 421); but did the sons of Jacob really bear the name of
Hebrews--_i.e._ men of the other side--when they came to Egypt? Does not
the meaning of the name in the places quoted seem rather to be of a
general kind, than to denote any one particular stock?

The kings Sethos I. and Ramses II. (1439-1322 B.C.) were engaged in
battle, as we have seen, with the Schasu, _i.e._ the shepherd tribes
between Egypt and Canaan, with the Hittites, who possessed the south of
Canaan, and other tribes of Syria (p. 150). Even though they obtained
successes over these nations, and Sethos I. once forced his way to the
Euphrates, and Ramses II. as far as the coasts of the Phenicians, yet
the Schasu, like the Cheta, continued to be dangerous enemies of Egypt.
If this were not so, why should Sethos have hit upon the plan of
protecting the eastern frontier from Pelusium to Heliopolis, by a vast
fortification? What induced Ramses, after several campaigns in Syria, to
conclude a peace with the Cheta in the year 1367 _B.C._ (p. 152), in
which the advantage was not with Egypt? Ramses III. had again to fight
with the Schasu, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Philistines (p.
164). But if Egypt had to take measures to keep off the shepherds and
the Syrians, they would hardly suffer doubtful subjects of the same
nation within their own borders; in the peace just mentioned it was
expressly stipulated that neither party should receive the subjects
coming to him from the other side (p. 153). Under such circumstances it
was necessary to take measures that the Hebrews should "not join with
the enemies," as the second text says.[621] The attempt had to be made
to settle and assimilate them, and make them Egyptians. The
fortifications from Pelusium to Heliopolis included just the region
allotted to the Hebrews. These works required hands to build them. There
was also the project of the canal from the Nile to the Arabian Gulf. As
the fortification surrounded Goshen, so the canal ran athwart it, from
Bubastis to the Lake of Crocodiles. If this canal, as well as the
fortifications, required a great number of hands--and naturally those
who were nearest would be first employed--the water brought by the canal
made it possible to change the pastures along the canal into arable
land, and to build cities upon it. From all this it is not improbable
that the oppression of which the Hebrews speak commenced under the reign
of Sethos I. continued under Ramses II, and was increased by the
building of those two cities.

The tradition of the Hebrews maintains that the Hebrew nation arose in
Egypt; in that country the family became a nation. The Egyptians could
endure a tribe of shepherds on their borders, but not a powerful nation.
With seventy souls, according to the first text, Jacob came into Egypt,
and at the end of their sojourn the Hebrews, according to the same
authority, had increased to 600,000 men, besides women and
children.[622] Supposing the seventy to be a sacred number, and
reckoning into the total "a number of strangers," who according to the
revision joined the Hebrews, it is still quite impossible, even if the
tribe which, as we assume, exchanged the pastures of the south of Canaan
for those on the Nile about the middle of the sixteenth century numbered
its thousands at the time of the change, that they should have increased
to 600,000 full-grown men, _i.e._ to more than two millions of souls,
within the given period of something less than the 250 years, to which
the length of their settlement on the Nile will be shown to be limited.
Even if we assume that the strangers made up a third of the whole total,
this is impossible. At a much later time the number of the fighting men
among the Hebrews can scarcely be reckoned higher than from two to three
hundred thousand. Even if we regard the total as including the whole
population, and not confined to the fighting men, it still appears very
high. Granting, too, that an enumeration was not in itself impossible
(the Hebrews had long had before them the pattern of the enumerations in
Egypt), yet a closer examination shows, that the total is founded upon
an average of 50,000 souls for each of the twelve tribes. This total
therefore must be given up as a mere attempt to glorify the ancient
times.[623] The events which follow show that the Israelites did really
increase from a tribe to a nation under the protection of Egypt, and
could put in the field from fifty to sixty thousand warriors,--a growth
and increase which in their old pastures, the proximity of the far more
powerful Edomites, Hittites, Midianites, and Amalekites, could hardly
have allowed sufficient space.

The twelve tribes, into which the nation of the Hebrews was divided,
were carried back to the sons of Jacob, who were thought to be their
ancestors. This fact has obviously influenced the number and position of
these sons in the tradition. The tribes which claimed to be the oldest
must have sprung from the oldest sons of Jacob; those who boasted of the
purest descent must have for their progenitors sons born in lawful
marriage; those whose blood was less pure were derived from sons born to
Jacob by the handmaids of his wives. We found above (p. 409) that Leah,
sprung from the true blood of the fathers, while yet in Haran, had borne
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon. The oldest families
of the Hebrews were named after Reuben. These, "the sons of Reuben,"
were "brave men who carried the sword and the shield, and drew the bow,
and were skilful in war;"[624] but even in later times they still
pursued the old pastoral mode of life in the mountain glades on the east
of Jordan, and hence had no important influence on the development of
the nation. This remarkable insignificance of the oldest tribe is
accounted for in the revision by a sin of the ancestor, who lay with
Bilhah, his father's handmaid.[625] According to the same prophetic
authority, Simeon and Levi also had done an unclean deed, and Judah had
once been equally guilty.[626] It is for his account of Judah only that
we must make this narrator entirely responsible. For the deeds of
Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, he has merely developed hints contained in the
"Blessings of Jacob," a poem of the time of the Judges, which he found
existing in the Ephraimitic text.[627] That poem says expressly that
Reuben, though the firstborn, was not to have the pre-eminence; and
Simeon and Levi, "because in their anger they slew a man, and in their
passion lamed a bull," were to be scattered in Israel, _i.e._ were to
have no district specially their own. In contrast to the tribes of
Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, this poem celebrated the tribe of
Joseph--under which name the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh were
included--whose praise has been already given, and it brings into
prominence the tribe of Judah. The strength of the nation rested on the
tribes of Ephraim and Judah; they had done the best service at the
conquest of Canaan, and were the foremost in defending the land. The
tribe of Ephraim was first in battle, and it retained this superiority
for centuries. The tribe was not sprung from the oldest, but from the
most beloved son of Jacob, the late-born son of Rachel. Ephraim was the
younger of the two sons born to Joseph by the Egyptian woman, but Jacob
had placed his right hand on the head of the younger son, and said, "By
thee shall Israel bless."[628] Such is the account of the Ephraimitic
text. In the Judæan Jacob is made to say, "Ephraim and Manasseh shall be
as my two firstborn."[629] The fathers of the tribes of Dan, Naphtali,
Gad, and Asher were considered to have been born to Jacob by his
handmaids.

FOOTNOTES:

[604] Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 32.

[605] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 273 ff.

[606] Ebers, "Durch Gosen," s. 430; "Ægypt. und die Bücher Moses," s.
330, 323 ff.

[607] Ebers, "Ægypt. und die Bücher Moses," s. 321, 322.

[608] Above p. 196; Ebers, _loc. cit._ s. 347.

[609] Lepsius, "Chronol." s. 382; Ebers, "Ægypten und die Bücher Moses,"
s. 296; Lauth, "Moses," s. 77.

[610] Exod. xii. 40.

[611] Ebers, "Durch Gosen," s. 505 ff.

[612] Generally only two or three. The longest genealogy is that of
Joshua: Ephraim, Beriah, Rephah, Telah, Tahan, Laadan, Ammihud,
Elishama, Nun (1 Chron. vii. 20 ff; cf. Numb. xxvi. 35; vii. 48; x. 22),
from which, if it were to be regarded as certain (Ewald, "Gesch.
Israel's," 1, 490, thinks that it is certain), it would follow that the
Hebrews were over 200 years in Egypt, assuming 25 years as the length of
a generation.

[613] 1 Kings vi. 1.

[614] Lepsius, "Chronolog." s. 365. On the possible twelve
representatives of those twelve generations, Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen,"
s. 190.

[615] Exod. i. 11; Gen. xlvii. 11.

[616] Exod. v. 6-11.

[617] Exod. i. 7, 13, 14.

[618] Chabas, "Mélang. égypt." pp. 2, 42 ff. That _lutu_ means
"Egyptians," as Ebers ("Ægypt." s. 96) thinks, is by no means certain.

[619] Ebers, "Durch Gosen." p. 494.

[620] Lauth, "Moses," s. 1.

[621] Exod. i. 10.

[622] Exod. xii. 37. Numb. i. 46.

[623] "With 600,000 men, besides the children," Exod. xii. 37, 38.
Numbers i. 22-46, enumerates 603,550 fighting men, who could take the
field, in the total sum, and in the totals for the several tribes, to
which must be added 22,000 male Levites, men and boys, Numb. iii. 39.
The question seems to me to be settled by Nöldeke ("Untersuchungen," s.
117).

[624] 1 Chron. vi. 18.

[625] Above, p. 409; Gen. xxxv. 22.

[626] Gen. xxxiv. 13, 25-30, xxxviii.

[627] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 280, n. 54.

[628] Gen. xlviii, 20.

[629] Gen. xlviii. 5; above, p. 425.




CHAPTER IX.

THE LIBERATION OF THE HEBREWS.


The oppression which, according to the Pentateuch, the Egyptians
exercised upon the sons of Jacob when settled in the land of Goshen, by
field-labour and tasks of building, may be regarded as a historical
fact. It is proved by the position of Egypt and her relations to her
neighbours on the north-east in the fourteenth century B.C., and it
agrees with the arrangements and aims entertained and carried out in
this border-land by Sethos I. and Ramses II. It must have been a
grievous burden for the Hebrews to pass from the easy life of shepherds
to the work of agriculture, and abandon the old life with their flocks.
In addition there were the heavy tasks of the fortifications, the canal,
and the new cities. Were they to give up the memory of their fathers,
and their attachment to their customary mode of life, in order to
perform taskwork for the Egyptians and become Egyptians? Was it possible
to escape this grievous oppression? How could they be freed from the
mighty power of the Pharaohs? Could the Hebrews, a peaceful nation and
without practice in war, venture to resist the numerous, disciplined,
and drilled armies of Egypt?

The Hebrew tradition gives the following account of the liberation of
their forefathers, connecting it with the supposed command of Pharaoh to
throw into the Nile all the male children born to the Israelites, and to
allow the daughters only to live. The son of Levi, the son of Jacob, was
Kahath, and Kahath's son was Amram. Amram had a son born to him by his
wife Jochebed. When Jochebed saw that the boy was fair, she hid him for
three months; and when she could hide him no longer, she took an ark of
reeds and daubed it with resin and pitch, and placed the boy in it, and
put the ark in the reeds on the bank of the Nile, and the boy's sister
was placed near to see what would come to pass. Then Pharaoh's daughter
came with her maidens to bathe in the river. She saw the ark, and caused
it to be brought to her, and when she opened it the boy wept. It is one
of the children of the Hebrews, she said, and had pity on it. Then the
sister came and offered to find a nursing-woman from among the Hebrews,
and brought her mother. When the child grew up, Pharaoh's daughter took
him for her son, and called him Moses. One day Moses went out to his
brethren and saw their burdens, and when an Egyptian smote a Hebrew, and
Moses perceived that no one was at hand, he slew the Egyptian, and fled
before Pharaoh into the land of Midian. And as he rested at a well, the
seven daughters of Jethro came to water the sheep of their father, but
the other shepherd prevented them, and drove them away. Then Moses came
to their help, and watered their sheep, and their father Jethro took him
in, and Moses found favour in his eyes, and took Zipporah, one of his
daughters, to wife, and kept Jethro's sheep. After many days the king of
Egypt died, and the sons of Israel sighed by reason of their burdens;
and God heard their complaint, and thought of his covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Then Moses, as he was keeping the flocks of
Jethro, and led them behind the desert, and came to Mount Horeb, saw a
bush burning with fire, but the bush was not consumed. And Moses
approached, and Jehovah spoke to him out of the bush, and said: I am the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; come not near; put thy shoes from off
thy feet, for the place where thou standest is holy ground. Then Moses
veiled his face, for he was afraid to look upon God. Then Jehovah said:
I have seen the misery of my people in Egypt, and I will deliver them.
Thou shalt go to Pharaoh and lead my people away to Canaan, to a land
flowing with milk and honey. Moses answered: O my Lord, I am not a man
of words; I cannot speak to the children of Israel, for I am dull of
speech and heavy of tongue. Go, said Jehovah, I will be with thy lips,
and will teach thee what to say; and Aaron thy brother, the priest, can
speak. Then Moses took his wife and his sons and put them upon the ass,
and turned back to Egypt, and Aaron his elder brother met him in the
desert. Moses told him the commands of Jehovah, and they gathered the
elders of Israel together, and the people believed their words.

Then Moses and Aaron came into the presence of the king of Egypt, and
said: Let us go with our people three days' journey into the desert and
sacrifice to our God Jehovah, that He may not visit us with the
pestilence or the sword. The king answered: Would ye free the people
from their tasks? Go to your work. And he ordered the taskmasters and
the overseers to increase the work of the Israelites, and make their
service heavier, and to give them no more straw for their bricks, so
that they might be compelled to gather straw for themselves. But the
daily tale of bricks remained the same, and the chiefs of the
Israelites were beaten because they could not make up the sum. Then
Moses and Aaron went again to Pharaoh, and Aaron threw down his rod
before the king, and lo! it became a serpent. Then the wise men and
magicians of Egypt cast their rods down, and they also became serpents,
but Aaron's serpent consumed the rest. And Aaron stretched out his hand
over the waters of Egypt, and the water in the stream was turned into
blood, and the fish died, and the water became foul and noisome. But the
magicians of Egypt did the same by their art. Then Aaron stretched out
his hand over the stream, and the frogs came up over the fields, into
the houses, the chambers, the beds, the ovens and kneading-troughs. Then
Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron to take away the frogs from him and his
land; he was willing to let them go. And the frogs died away out of the
houses, the courts, and the fields. But when Pharaoh was delivered he
hardened his heart, and would not let the Hebrews go. Then Aaron turned
the dust of the earth into flies, and Moses and Aaron took at Jehovah's
bidding ashes of the oven and sprinkled them in the air, and the dust of
the ashes became boils and blains, breaking out on man and beast, on the
magicians, and all the Egyptians. And Moses stretched out his hand to
heaven, and Jehovah caused it to thunder and hail, and fire came down,
and the hail smote all that was in the field, man and beast, and all the
herbs of the field; and all the trees were destroyed; only in the land
of Goshen there was no hail. And Moses stretched out his hand over all
Egypt, and Jehovah brought the east wind, and in the morning the east
wind brought swarms of locusts, and they ate up all that the hail had
left in the field: there was nothing green in the field and in the
trees. And Moses stretched his hand towards heaven, and there was a
thick darkness in the land of Egypt for three days. And now the king was
willing to let Israel go, but their flocks and herds must remain behind.
Moses answered that not a single hoof should remain, and went in wrath
from the presence of Pharaoh. But to the Israelites he said: At midnight
Jehovah will go forth and smite all the firstborn of Egypt, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh to the firstborn of the woman behind the mill, and
all the firstborn of cattle. But they were to slay a yearling lamb
without blemish for each household, and to eat it roast, with unleavened
bread and bitter herbs. With loins girded, with shoes on their feet, and
staff in hand, they were to keep the feast. With the blood of the lamb
they were to strike the door-posts and the lintel of their houses, that
Jehovah might see the blood and pass by their doors. In the morning
there was not a house of the Egyptians in which there was not one dead.
There was a great cry in Egypt, and the king called Moses and Aaron and
said: Depart with your people, your flocks, and your herds.

Then the children of Israel set forth from Ramses to Succoth--600,000
men on foot, besides children. And with them went a number of strangers,
and many flocks and herds. And they went from Succoth, and encamped at
Etham, on the edge of the desert; and from Etham they went to
Pihahiroth, and encamped over against Baalzephon. But Pharaoh was
grieved that he had let the people go from their service; he pursued
them with all his chariots, his horsemen, and his army, and found them
encamped on the sea at Pihahiroth, over against Baalzephon. But Moses
stretched out his hand over the sea, and Jehovah caused the sea to go
back by a strong east wind through the whole night, and made the sea
into dry land, and the Israelites passed through the midst of the sea,
and the waters were a wall upon their right hand and a wall upon their
left. And the Egyptians pursued and came after them with their chariots
and their horsemen into the sea. Then Moses again stretched out his
hand, and the sea returned towards morning into its bed, and covered the
chariots and the horsemen of Pharaoh, so that not one of them was left.

And Moses and the children of Israel sang: I will sing of Jehovah, for
he is glorious; the horses and chariots he whelms in the sea; Jehovah,
the God of my father, will I praise. Jehovah is a man of war; Thy right
hand, O Jehovah, shatters the enemy. The chariots of Pharaoh and his
might he threw into the sea; his chosen charioteers were drowned in the
reed-sea. The floods covered them; like stones they sank in the pit. At
the breath of Thy nostrils the waters rose in a heap; the floods stood
like a bank; the floods ran in the midst of the sea. The enemy said: I
will pursue, and overtake, and divide the spoil; I will satisfy my lust
upon them; I will draw my sword, and destroy them with my hand. Thou
didst blow with Thy mouth, O Jehovah, and the sea covered them; they
sank like lead in the mighty waters. Who among the gods is like unto
thee, Jehovah?[630]

The older text narrated in a simple manner, that the Hebrews multiplied
greatly in Egypt, and the Egyptians vexed them with heavy burdens, and
God heard their cry, and thought of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. Then God spoke to Moses: he would take Israel for his people,
and lead them out of Egypt, and Moses spoke to the children of Israel,
but they did not listen to him. Then the command came to Moses to speak
to Pharaoh, and Aaron was to speak for him. Afterwards came the plagues
(to which the revision has added the hail, the locusts, and the
darkness),[631] the slaying of the firstborn, the march through the sea
as described.[632] The text of the tribes of Joseph is far better
instructed, or, at any rate, far more detailed in its account of Moses,
no less than in that of Joseph. To it belongs the command of Pharaoh to
slay the children of the Hebrews, the rescue of Moses, the history of
his youth, his flight into the desert, his connection with Jethro, the
appearance of God on Sinai, and certain traits in the dealings with
Pharaoh, and the direct action of God in the march through the sea and
the desert.

Of both these narratives the tendency is the same, it is only more
strongly marked and broadly realised in the second. The God of the
Hebrews has pity on the sufferings of his people. He provides and
arouses their leader. To him and to Aaron he imparts the power of
working miracles which the magicians of Egypt can only imitate up to a
certain point. Yet the power of working miracles given to Moses and
Aaron is not enough to overcome Pharaoh. The decisive stroke is given by
Jehovah himself, inasmuch as he smites the firstborn among the Egyptians
of man and beast. And when Pharaoh hastens after the Hebrews Jehovah
causes the sea to retire before them, and finally buries Pharaoh and his
host under the returning waves. Thus has Jehovah led his people out of
Egypt with a strong hand and an outstretched arm.

The narrative of the slaying of the firstborn of the Egyptians and the
mode in which the Hebrews protected themselves from the visitation are
borrowed from the Hebrew ritual. We saw above that the firstlings of the
fruits, and "all that first opens the womb, man or beast," belonged to
the God of the Hebrews.[633] This firstborn must be sacrificed, or
ransomed by a vicarious sacrifice. In the spring the sacrifice of the
firstfruits was offered from an ancient period, and unleavened bread
eaten, as was usual with shepherds.[634] The spring, the time when
nature has borne anew, was also the right time to offer the sacrifice
for the redemption of the house. The head of the family at the spring
festival slew a lamb without breaking any bone, and with the blood he
smeared the lintel and door-posts. Hence the offering in the spring was
also the festival of redemption and purification--the passover, the
_passah_ of Jehovah, who had spared the house for the lamb. To this old
spring sacrifice, which was celebrated in the month Nisan, the first
month of the Hebrew year (it was the year of the Babylonians), at the
time of the full moon, when the sun was in the Ram, the first text has
already attached a historical background and meaning. It was in the
night following this sacrifice that the exodus from Egypt took place.
The unleavened bread of the ancient custom was explained by the haste of
the exodus; and as signs of the readiness to go forth, the girdle round
the loins, the shoes upon the feet, and the staff in the hand were
added to the old ritual; the smearing of the lintel with the blood was
done in order that the angel of Jehovah might distinguish the doors of
the Israelites from those of the Egyptians. Tradition turned the spring
festival and sacrifice into a feast of thanksgiving for the protection
of the firstborn of the Israelites while Jehovah carried off those of
the Egyptians, a thanksgiving for the deliverance of the nation out of
Egypt.

The lofty calling of the man whom Jehovah summoned to be the instrument
of the deliverance is shown in the Ephraimitic text by the marvellous
fortune which attended him even in his earliest years. The daughter of
Pharaoh himself, disregarding her father's commands, rescues the boy,
brings him up, takes him for her son, and gives the name to the man who
is destined to liberate the Hebrews and bring so much misfortune upon
Egypt. Amid the kindness shown to him by the Egyptians Moses does not
forget the people to whom he belongs. The sight of the oppressions which
his people suffer kindles his heart. A rash action, by which he avenges
the ill-treatment of a Hebrew, compels him to fly into the desert. Here
he founds a family by taking a Midianitish woman, a daughter of the
desert, to wife. In the second text the father of his wife is called
Jethro, in the revision Reuel.[635] When he has begotten sons here, and
is advanced in years, his mission is revealed to him on the mountain of
God. In both texts he hesitates to undertake it, but finally carries it
resolutely to the end.

As in the narrative of Joseph, so here, all that is said of Egypt agrees
with what we know from other sources of that country. As the Hebrews
were settled to the east of the Tanitic arm of the Nile, the locality
of the exposure in the meaning of the Ephraimitic text must be sought
in the neighbourhood of Tanis. We saw above that Ramses II. erected
considerable buildings in this district (p. 134). The name Moses, which
the king's daughter is said to have given to the rescued boy, may be
connected without violence with the Egyptian messu, _i.e._ the child.
The plagues too which tradition represents as coming upon Egypt are
suited to the nature of the land. Even now the water of the Nile becomes
at times red and disagreeable in smell; often after the inundation
swarms of frogs cover the fields, and at the same time myriads of
marsh-gnats and flies rise out of the mud, and locusts from time to time
in thick devastating swarms cover the fields in the valley of the
Nile.[636] Eruptions of the skin also occur after the inundation, and
sometimes grow into large boils. Storms of hail, though not entirely
unknown, are yet extremely rare in Egypt, and storms from the
south-west, which in the spring blow over the great desert, are one of
the worst plagues in Egypt; they bring with them violent heat and thick
dust, which darkens the sky.

If we attempt to ascertain the historical value of these narratives, it
follows from the helpless position of the Hebrews in regard to the
Egyptians which we have already described, that the idea of rescuing
them from the dominion of Egypt could only have been entertained by a
resolute spirit, and the undertaking begun by a leader who was prepared
to make the highest venture in order to preserve the highest
prize--nationality and religion. Among the Hebrews there could be no
other thought but to leave the borders of Egypt in order to resume the
old mode of life in the deserts of Syria, and there to worship their
old God in the old manner. In harmony with the situation the Ephraimitic
text represents the resolution to make an exodus as growing up after
long hesitation and grave thought in the soul of a man who, owing to the
oppression of his people, had come into the sharpest conflict with
Egypt, had fled into the desert in order to save his life, and there had
again seen and lived the free life of the kindred tribes. If the Hebrews
intended to leave Egypt it was necessary to know certainly that the
tribes of the desert, or at least a part, would receive them, and that
they would not one and all oppose them. By combination with the
Midianites the conditions most needed for the exodus could be supplied.
If of the Midianites and the Amalekites, the desert tribes who dwelt
nearest to Egypt, the first were gained for the Hebrews, and from them
support, assistance, and alliance in repulsing an Egyptian attack might
be expected, then it was possible to hope for success in the venture.
The Ephraimitic text represents the Hebrews as choosing that moment for
carrying out the exodus in which there was a change of the succession in
Egypt, and it is obvious that a change of this kind, the commencement of
a new and perhaps contested dominion, secured better prospects for the
Hebrews than an established rule when obedience was unchallenged.

According to the older text the Israelites gathered together near the
city of Ramses (Abu Kesheb) for the exodus. We have seen that this city
was built on the canal, nearly in the middle of the district allotted to
the Hebrews; it was therefore the natural place for meeting. From this
the Israelites took a southern direction towards the north-west point of
the Arabian Gulf, which is known to the Hebrews as the reed-sea. This
was the shortest way of reaching the deserts of the peninsula of Sinai
and the pastures of the Midianites, and on this line the Hebrews had the
Bitter Lakes at hand, from which could be obtained what water was
absolutely necessary. When they had passed Succoth, Etham, Pihahiroth,
and had reached the corner of the reed-sea, as the first text describes,
the pursuit overtook them, which Pharaoh had begun with a
hastily-collected force. Southward of the extreme point of the reed-sea,
in the neighbourhood of Suez, there are firths which can be crossed at
the ebb, especially if a strong north-east wind drives back the waves to
the south-west. By a strong east wind, blowing through the whole night,
Jehovah caused the sea to retire, and turned it into dry land; and the
water became a wall on the right hand and the left, as we learnt from
the oldest account. The extreme point of the reed-sea, _i.e._ the sea on
the left of the firth, is too deep to be crossed, on the right the wind
and the ebb kept the waters back.[637] Thus it was not in itself
impossible that the Hebrews reached the other shore, _i.e._ the
peninsula of Sinai, by passing through the firth and cutting off the
extreme point of the sea; and not impossible that the Egyptian army in
their eagerness to overtake the Hebrews, or afraid that the marshes at
the head of the sea would detain them so long that they could not come
up with them before the desert made pursuit very difficult, attempted to
cross the sea when the water had already returned. The narrative is
supported to some extent by the ancient song of victory (p. 446). This
song, it is true, cannot be proved to belong to that period, but it is
nevertheless of very ancient origin.[638]

The account which the Egyptians and Manetho give of the exodus of the
Hebrews has been already related. According to it the Hebrews are impure
and leprous Egyptians whom Pharaoh had banished to the quarries east of
the Nile, and made to work there, like other Egyptians employed in that
task. That the Hebrews are Egyptians, and leprous Egyptians, in the
Egyptian tradition, need excite no astonishment; white leprosy was a
disease from which the Israelites frequently suffered. We cannot contest
the number of the lepers, which Manetho puts at 80,000, though we have
already seen that the Hebrews at the time of the exodus could hardly
have approached this number of men capable of work. The Hebrew tradition
in both texts represents the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, the
descendants of Joseph and an Egyptian woman, as growing up during the
settlement in Egypt; the revision adds that a "number of strangers" left
Egypt with their forefathers. Moses, the leader of the lepers, is
described by Manetho as an Egyptian priest of Heliopolis, of the name of
Osarsiph. We saw that Heliopolis was the nearest centre of Egyptian
religious worship to the land of Goshen, and that the second text gives
the daughter of a priest of Heliopolis to Joseph to wife. According to
this text also Moses is brought up by the Egyptians, and the revision
calls him an "Egyptian."[639] Hence we can at once accept the statement
of Manetho that the leader of the Hebrews was skilled in the wisdom of
the Egyptian priests.[640] On the other hand the more detailed
narrative of Manetho is in itself far more improbable, more full of
contradictions and impossibilities, than the account of the Hebrews. It
does not agree with the tenor of Manetho's narrative when we find
Pharaoh giving over the fortified city of Avaris to the leprous
Egyptians whom he had banished to the stone quarries. In that city the
lepers rebel, there they make the priest of Heliopolis, Osarsiph, their
leader, and Osarsiph gives them the law, to worship no god, to eat the
most sacred animals, and to have dealings only with their confederates.
From hence he summons the Hyksos, who had been driven out of Avaris a
long time before, and had meanwhile built Jerusalem. Pharaoh goes with
an army of 300,000 of the best warriors of Egypt against the
conspirators, 80,000 unclean persons and 200,000 shepherds, yet turns
back voluntarily, and flies towards Ethiopia, while the confederates
desolate Egypt without pity for thirteen years. It is hardly credible
that a king of Egypt should abandon his kingdom without a struggle to
lepers and the descendants of the Hyksos. And if anyone is inclined to
assume that the Hebrews did actually combine, not with the supposed
Hyksos of Jerusalem, but perhaps with the Midianites, and conquer Egypt
and force the king into Ethiopia, and so rule over Egypt for thirteen
years--their tradition would not have forgotten or suppressed such a
glorious achievement of the nation, such a proof of the power of
Jehovah. Compared with this wholly purposeless exile of the king, the
account of the Hebrews seems far more credible--that Pharaoh did make
the attempt to stop the migration, but that the attempt was without
success.

It remains to fix the date at which the Hebrews succeeded in escaping
from the dominion of Egypt, and resuming their old mode of life in the
deserts of Syria. It has already been proved that Sethos I. and Ramses
II. were the Pharaohs who oppressed the Hebrews; and it is in harmony
with the whole situation to assume that the attempt to escape from this
oppression would be made under a less powerful successor. If, as is
shown above (p. 159), the Pharaoh of Manetho, who banished the lepers
and retired before them, was Menephta, the son and successor of Ramses
II., it would be Ramses II. before whom Moses fled into the desert, and
after his death he would have returned and carried out against his son
the attempt he could not have ventured upon against so powerful a ruler
as Ramses II. Menephta's rule falls in the years 1322 to 1302 B.C. Hence
the exodus of the Hebrews must be placed in this period, about the year
1320 B.C.[641] The immigration into the land of Goshen, we found that we
might place about the year 1550 B.C. (p. 433). Hence they dwelt there
about 230 years, and this lapse of time corresponds pretty closely to
the eight generations which the table of the leader under whom the
Hebrews afterwards conquered Canaan gave for the sojourn in Egypt (p.
431). When the Hebrews, after retiring from Egypt, wished to give up the
peninsula of Sinai, and settle themselves in the east of Jordan, they
besought "the king of Edom," according to the second text, for a free
passage through his country. The first text knows and mentions eight
kings who had ruled over Edom "before kings ruled over Israel." As the
monarchy was established in Israel about the year 1050 B.C. (see below),
eight generations would carry us two centuries beyond the date of Saul,
king of Israel, if this list could be regarded as historical, but the
two first names in it seem of a mythical rather than a historical
kind.[642]

The oldest accounts of western writers of the fortunes of the Hebrews
date from the time of the successors of Alexander of Macedon. They were
founded partly on accounts of the Egyptians, and partly on accounts of
the Hebrews themselves. The narrative of Hecataeus of Abdera, who was in
Egypt in the time of Ptolemy I., and wrote an Egyptian history, gives us
the most unprejudiced account, composed from the widest point of view,
and connects the emigration of the Hebrews, whom he does not consider
Egyptians, with the supposed emigration from Egypt to Greece. "Once,
when a pestilence had broken out in Egypt, the cause of the visitation
was generally ascribed to the anger of the gods. As many strangers of
various extraction dwelt in Egypt, and observed different customs in
religion and sacrifice, it came to pass that the hereditary worship of
the gods was being given up in Egypt. The Egyptians, therefore, were of
opinion that they would obtain no alleviation of the evil unless they
removed the people of foreign extraction. When they were driven out, the
noblest and bravest part of them, as some say, under noble and renowned
leaders, Danaus and Cadmus, came to Hellas; but the great bulk of them
migrated into the land, not far removed from Egypt, which is now called
Judæa, and was at that time without inhabitants. These emigrants were
led by Moses, who was the most distinguished among them for wisdom and
bravery. When he had settled in the land he built several cities, among
them Jerusalem, which is now the most famous. He also built the most
celebrated temples, taught the worship of the God, and the ritual, and
arranged the constitution, and gave laws. He divided the people into
twelve tribes, because this number is the most complete, and corresponds
to the number of the months which make up the year. The most handsome
men, who could also at the same time guide the united people best, he
made priests, and arranged that they should concern themselves with all
that was sacred, the religious worship and the sacrifices, and at the
same time he made them judges in the most important matters, and put
into their hands the preservation of the laws and customs. He erected no
images of the gods, because he did not believe that God had the form of
men; he rather believed that the heaven which surrounds the earth was
alone god and lord of all things. The sacrifices, too, and manner of
life he arranged unlike those of other people; owing to their own
banishment, he introduced among them a misanthropic and inhospitable
life. At the end of his laws is written: This Moses has heard from God,
and tells it to the Jews. This lawgiver also made provision for war, and
compelled the young men to exercise themselves in strength and
manliness, and the endurance of privations. He undertook campaigns
against the neighbouring nations, and divided the conquered land by lot,
and gave to the priests larger lots than to the rest. But no one was
permitted to trade with his lot, in order that none might from avarice
buy up the lots and drive away the more needy (by this is meant no doubt
the Hebrew year of Jubilee). He forced the people also to bring up their
children, and as it was possible to do this with little cost, the tribes
of the Jews were always numerous. About their marriages and their
burials he laid down quite different laws from those in use among other
nations."[643]

When Antiochus Sidetes besieged Jerusalem in the year 134 B.C., and
began to treat with the city, the greater part of the counsellors of the
king (so Diodorus tells us) were of opinion that the Jews ought to be
destroyed, for of all nations they were the only one who had no
community with others, and contracted no marriages with them, and
regarded them all as enemies. Their forefathers had been banished out of
the whole of Egypt as godless men, and abhorred of heaven. At that time
all who had white leprosy, and scales upon the body, were collected as
being under a curse and sent over the border in order to purify the
land. The expelled persons had then gathered together and formed the
nation of the Jews; they had taken the districts round about Jerusalem,
and propagated their hatred of mankind. Hence they had adopted wholly
different laws from others. They were not to eat with strangers at one
table, or bear them any friendly feeling. When Antiochus Epiphanes
conquered the Jews (167 B.C.), he went into the innermost shrine of the
temple, which only the priests might enter, and there he found the stone
image of a man with a long beard, who was riding on an ass with a book
in his hand. This statue he took for an image of Moses, who had founded
Jerusalem, gathered the people together, and given the wicked and
misanthropic laws.[644]

Strabo remarks that southern Syria "was inhabited by mixed tribes of
Egyptian, Arabian, and Phenician origin, but the prevailing legend of
the temple at Jerusalem called the ancestors of the Jews Egyptians. For
Moses, one of the Egyptian priests, who occupied a part of this land,
and was dissatisfied with his condition, removed from that country, and
many who worshipped the deity emigrated with him, and Moses told them
and taught that the Egyptians were not right in representing the
divinity as a wild or domesticated animal, nor the Libyans, nor were the
Hellenes wise in giving gods the form of men. For only the One was God
which surrounds us all and the earth and the sea, and who was called
Uranus and Cosmos, and the nature of things. How could any reasoning
creature venture to make an image which should truly represent this
nature? All making of images must be cast aside, a sacred place must be
marked off, and a temple erected, and prayers offered without any image.
In order to have fortunate dreams it was needful to sleep in the
sanctuary, and those who were wise and lived with justice could always
expect signs and gifts from God. By such doctrines Moses convinced not a
few men of reason, and led them to the place where Jerusalem now is. He
easily obtained possession of the land, because it was not sufficiently
valuable for anyone to fight vigorously for it. It is rocky, and the
district round the city is without water. At the same time he pretended
to take it for the sake of the sanctity of the place, and the deity for
whom he sought a dwelling, and established such a ritual and such
sacrificial customs, that the worshippers were not compelled to undergo
great expense, or vex themselves by any ecstasies, contortions of the
body, or vile occupation. As this was well received, Moses established
no unimportant dominion, for those who dwelt round about were induced by
his speeches and promises to join him. But at a later time superstitious
and even tyrannical men acquired the priesthood, and from superstition
the abstinences from food, circumcision, and mutilation and other things
of the kind became law, and are observed even to this day. The
capricious nature of the ruling power ended in robbery, for the
insurgents plundered the land. But those who were with the rulers
subjugated even the border territories, and conquered a good deal of
Syria and Phoenicia. Yet the fortress, which, instead of treating it
as a place of confinement they worshipped as a temple, retained a
certain dignity."[645]

Better acquainted with the traditions of the Hebrews, Nicolaus of
Damascus tells us that Abraham came with an army out of Chaldæa, which
lies beyond Babylon, and ruled over Damascus. Not long after he again
set out from this place with his people, and established himself in the
land which was then called Chananæa, and afterwards Judæa. Here he dwelt
and his numerous posterity. "The name of Abraham is still praised in the
region of Damascus, and a village is pointed out which is called
Abraham's dwelling, after him."[646] This account, of which the
continuation in the writings of Nicolaus is lost, was used, as it
seems, by Trogus Pompeius. His account survives only in the excerpt of
Justinus. "The Jews," so we find in this excerpt, "derive their origin
from Damascus, the most famous city of Syria. This city took its name
from king Damascus, in whose honour the Syrians revered the tomb of his
wife Astarte as a temple, and worshipped her as a goddess in the most
sacred manner. After Damascus, Azelus reigned, then Adores, then
Abraham, and lastly Israhel. Israhel became more famous than his
predecessors, for he had ten sons to help him. So he left the nation
divided into ten kingdoms to his sons, and called them after the name of
Juda, who died after the division, Judæans, and commanded that his
memory should be held in honour by all, because his share had profited
all the others. The youngest of the brothers was Joseph. The others were
afraid of his pre-eminent gifts, and secretly they got him into their
power, and sold him to foreign merchants. By these he was carried to
Egypt, and as he gave his mind eagerly to the magic arts of the place,
he was soon in high estimation even with the king. For he was the most
acute expounder of signs and wonders, and first founded the
interpretation of dreams. Nothing in divine or human ordinances seemed
hidden from him; he even foresaw the unfruitfulness of the land many
years before it came. The whole of Egypt would have been destroyed by
famine had not the king, at Joseph's suggestion, ordered corn to be laid
by for many years previously, and he gave such proofs of his wisdom that
his answers seemed to be those of a god and not of a man. His son was
Moses, who in addition to the inheritance of his father's wisdom,
received also great beauty of person. But at the bidding of an oracle
the Egyptians banished him, because they were afflicted with scab and
leprosy, with all the diseased persons beyond their borders, so that he
might not infect more. Chosen to be leader of the exiles, Moses took
from the Egyptians their sacred things. The Egyptians rose to recover
them by force of arms, but were compelled to return by storms. Then
Moses as he turned towards his old fatherland, Damascus, settled on
Mount Syna. As he came there with his people exhausted after seven days'
privations in the deserts of Arabia, he consecrated each seventh day a
fast for all time. After the manner of the people this day was called
Sabbata, because it had put an end to the hunger and wandering. And when
they remembered that they had been driven out of Egypt from fear of
contamination, they were careful that they should not be hated by the
inhabitants from the same causes and had no dealings with them, which
rule in time became a strict custom and religious observance. After
Moses, his son Arvas became priest of the Egyptian sacred things, and
was soon after chosen to be king. Since then it became a custom among
the Jews that their priests should be at the same time kings, and their
duties as judges, combined with the worship of the god, held the nation
uncommonly close together."[647]

The most marvellous story is that of Lysimachus of Alexandria, who
brings down the exodus of the Jews to the eighth century B.C. "At the
time of king Bocchoris, unclean and leprous men had come into the
temples to beg for food. Hence there was a blight in the land; and
Bocchoris received a response from Ammon, that the temples must be
purified. The lepers, as if the sun were angry at their existence, were
to be plunged into the sea, and the unclean were to be driven out of the
land. Hence the lepers were tied to plates of lead, and thrown into the
sea; but the unclean were driven out helpless into the desert. These met
together in council; in the night they lit fires and lights, and called,
fasting, upon the gods to save them. Then a certain Moses advised them
to go through the desert till they came to inhabited regions, but at the
same time required them to show kindness to no man, to advise every one
for the worst, and to destroy all altars and temples upon which they
came. The exiles approved, and after many hardships came through the
desert to an inhabited land, and after treating the men cruelly, robbing
and burning the temples, they established a city Hierosyla
(temple-plunder) in Judæa, and afterwards, to lessen the disgrace, the
name was slightly altered into Hierosolyma (Jerusalem)."[648]

Even this narrative was accepted and believed. Tacitus first enumerated
the different views of the writers on the origin of the Jews, in order
finally to agree in all essential points with the narrative of
Lysimachus. "According to the view of some," Tacitus says, "the Jews
were descendants of the Ethiopians, whom fear and disinclination
compelled, at the time of king Kepheus, to change their dwelling; others
say that a horde coming from Assyria gained possession of a part of
Egypt, and soon after passed into the neighbouring parts of Syria, and
inhabited the Hebrew land and cities." The latter statement obviously
confounds the immigration of the Hyksos and the Jews, and makes them a
mingled horde of Assyrians, but still is nearest the truth. "Others,
again," Tacitus continues, "are of opinion that under the rule of Isis
in Egypt, the number of men became too great, and the superfluous
multitudes were settled under the leadership of Hierosolymus and Judah
in the neighbouring lands. But most authorities agree that under king
Bocchoris a contagious disease raged in Egypt, and the oracle of Ammon
bade them purify the kingdom and remove the diseased persons out of the
land as a race hated by the gods. Hence the unclean were collected and
left behind in the desert. Amid their idle lamentations one of the
exiles, Moses, warned them that they had no assistance to expect from
gods or men, for they were abandoned by both, but they were to trust to
him as a heavenly leader by whose assistance they might be rescued from
their present calamities. To this they agreed, and in complete ignorance
struck out a path at random. The want of water distressed them most, and
almost at death's door they sank upon the ground, when a herd of wild
asses ran from the pasture to a rock covered with trees. Moses followed
them, and found copious streams of water. This saved them, and after a
march of six days they came on the seventh day to a region where, when
they had expelled the inhabitants, they founded a city and a temple. In
order to strengthen the nation and establish his own supremacy, Moses
gave them new customs, quite opposed to the usages of the rest of the
world. What we consider sacred, they regard as profane; and what is
permitted to us is forbidden to them. The image of the animal which had
shown them an escape from their wanderings, and put an end to their
thirst, they placed in the innermost shrine, after they had slain a ram.
in order, as it were, to throw contempt upon Ammon. They abstained from
swine's flesh in remembrance of the misery which the leprosy, to which
this animal is subject, had once brought upon them. The long hunger
which they then endured they still avow by frequent fasts; and as a
proof of the fruits once stolen, their bread is unleavened. On the
seventh day they rest, because the seventh day brought them to an end of
their labours; the seventh year also, induced by their laziness, they
have given up to inaction. Others are of opinion that this is done in
honour of Saturn, because Saturn completes the highest circle of all the
seven stars which rule the fortunes of men, and is of pre-eminent power,
and most constellations accomplish their influence and their orbits by
the number seven.

"Other abominable customs have come into force owing to their vile
corruption. For all the worst of men, despising their hereditary
religions, brought money and contributions to them; and because among
them stiffnecked belief and ready assistance was to be found, and deadly
hatred towards the rest of the world, their power increased. They do not
eat with strangers or make marriages with them; and this nation,
otherwise most prone to debauchery, abstains from all strange women.
They have introduced circumcision in order to distinguish themselves
thereby; and those who have adopted their customs follow this practice.
The first lesson learnt by their youth is to hate the gods, to despise
their country, to disregard parents, children, and brothers. Yet they
take considerable care to increase their numbers. It is a sin to slay a
kinsman, and the souls of all slain in battle and by execution they
consider immortal. Hence they have a lively impulse to beget children,
and they hold death in contempt. The custom of burying the dead,
instead of burning them, they have borrowed from the Egyptians; on the
other hand, the Jews alone worship in the spirit a single deity, while
the Egyptians offer prayer to many animals and composite images. They
also consider it profane to make any images of God out of perishable
material in the form of men, for the deity is the Highest, the Eternal,
the Unchangeable and Imperishable. Hence in their cities and temples
there are no images. As their priests use the music of flutes and drums,
and wear crowns of ivy, and a golden vine was found in the temple, some
have thought that they worshipped the conqueror of the East, the god
Bacchus. But the rites are widely different. Bacchus inaugurated blithe
and merry festivals; but the customs of the Jews are absurd and
melancholy.[649]"

FOOTNOTES:

[630] Exod. xv. 1-11; cf. Joshua xxiv. 7.

[631] Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 40.

[632] Exod. i. 1-7, 13, 14; ii. 23, 24; vi. 2-7, 9-27; vii. 8-13, 19-22;
viii. 1-4, 12-15; ix. 8-11; xii. 1-23, 37, 40-51; xiii. 20; xiv. 8, 9,
15-17, 21-23, 29.

[633] Exod. xiii. 2; xxii. 29, 30; xxxiv. 19, 20. "The firstborn of thy
sons thou shalt give to me. Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and
thy sheep. All that openeth the matrix is mine, all thy cattle that is
male. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem." Cf. Exod. xxx.
11-16.

[634] Ewald, "Alterthümer des Volkes Israel," s. 358 ff.

[635] De Wette-Schrader. "Einleitung," s. 282, 284, 290.

[636] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 46, 47.

[637] Ebers. "Durch Gosen." s. 101 ff.

[638] Nöldeke. "Untersuchungen," s. 47. According to De Wette-Schrader,
from the second text ("Einleitung," 283), verses 11-17 may be an
addition; verses 19-21 obviously come from the revision.

[639] Exod. ii. 19.

[640] Büdinger ("Akad. d. Wissenschaft zu Wien," Sitzung vom, 15
October, 1873) regards Moses and Aaron as of Egyptian origin, as
Egyptian priests, and finds the tribe of Levi in the leprous Egyptians
who went out with the Hebrews. Lauth ("Moses der Hebraeer," and
"Zeitsch. d. d. M. G." 1871, s. 135 ff) inclines to recognise Moses in
the mohar, sotem (scribe) and messu of the papyrus Anastasi I., who
would thus have been one of the Egyptian scholars, and employed by
Ramses II. in matters of state and war. This view is opposed by Pleyte
("Zeitschr. f. aeg. Sprache," 1869, s. 30, 100 ff.); he reads the name
Ptah-messu. Lauth, at the same time, refuses to derive the name Osarsiph
from Osiris; he considers it to be Semitic, and explains it as
a-sar-suph, _i.e._ "rush-basket."

[641] Lepsius, "Königsbuch der Ægypten," s. 117-150. Maspero objects
that Egypt in the time of Menephta was still too powerful for the
Israelites to carry out their exodus. Such a plan was possible for the
first time in the last years of Sethos II. (above, p. 150), or shortly
after his death ("Hist. Ancienne," p. 259). These considerations are of
too general a nature to allow any definite conclusions to be founded
upon them; and if Josephus or his copyist changed the Menephtes of
Manetho into the much better known Amenophis, or mistook one for the
other, a similar interchange cannot so easily be assumed for the names
Sethos and Menephtes.

[642] Gen. xxxvi. 31-39; Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 87.

[643] Diod. 40, frag. 3.

[644] Diod. 34, frag. 1.

[645] Strabo, p. 760, 761.

[646] Fragm. 30, ed. Müller.

[647] Justin. "Hist." 36, 2.

[648] Joseph. "c. Apion." 1, 34.

[649] "Hist." 5, 2-5.




CHAPTER X.

THE HEBREWS IN THE DESERT.


The fortunes and achievements of the Israelites after leaving Egypt and
escaping the pursuit of the Egyptians, are narrated in the second,
third, and fourth books of the Pentateuch in the following manner. From
the reed-sea the Israelites marched into the wilderness of Shur, and for
three days found no water. When they came to Marah, they could not drink
the water there, because it was bitter. Then Jehovah showed Moses a
piece of wood, and he threw it into the water, so that the water became
sweet. From Marah they came to Elim, where were twelve wells and seventy
palm-trees, and they encamped there by the water. From Elim they came
into the wilderness of Sin, and the people murmured against Moses,
because there was no food to be found; but at evening Jehovah caused
swarms of quails to rise which covered the camp, and in the morning
manna had fallen, which lay like hoar frost upon the ground, and the
people were allowed to gather manna for six days, but on the seventh
they were not allowed to gather it. And Israel set forth from the
wilderness of Sin and encamped at Rephidim. There there was no water to
drink, and the people were angry with Moses; but Jehovah said to Moses:
Take thy staff with which thou didst smite the Nile; thou shalt smite
the rock, and the water shall flow forth. And Moses did so before all
Israel, and they called the name of the place Massah and Meribah. And
Amalek came and strove with Israel in Rephidim, and was smitten down
with the edge of the sword. And Jethro, the priest of Midian, the
father-in-law of Moses, came and advised Moses to choose valiant men for
his helpers, as overseers over the people and judges for the matters of
smaller moment. And Moses did so.

In the third month after the exodus from Egypt, the Israelites set forth
from Rephidim, and came into the desert of Sinai, and encamped over
against the mountain. The people were commanded to purify themselves and
wash their garments, and Moses forbad any one to approach the mountain.
On the third day, when it was morning, there was thunder and lightning,
and a thick cloud stood upon the mountain, and there was a mighty sound
of trumpets. And all the people heard the thunder and saw the flames and
the smoking mountain, and the mountain quaked, and all trembled. But
Moses led them to meet Jehovah at the foot of the mountain. And Jehovah
came down to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. For forty days
and forty nights Moses was on the mountain, and Jehovah revealed to him
his laws, and the finger of God wrote them on two stone tables. And
Jehovah spoke to Moses out of the darkness, and told him all the
ordinances which he should lay upon the people. But the cloud covered
the mountain, and the glory of Jehovah was a consuming fire on the top
of the mountain.

When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mountain,
the people said to Aaron: We know not what has happened to the man who
led us out of Egypt; make us a god to go before us. And Aaron said to
them: Take off the golden rings which are in the ears of your wives,
your daughters, and your sons. They brought him the rings, and he made
of them a golden calf, and built an altar before the calf. Then they
said: That is the god, who led us out of Egypt; and Aaron caused a
festival to be proclaimed to Jehovah, and they brought a thank-offering
to the calf, and the people ate and drank and stood up to dance. But
when Moses came down from the mountain with the stone tablets in his
hand, and heard the singing and shouting, and saw the calf and the
dancing, his anger was kindled. He cast the tables out of his hand, and
broke them at the foot of the mountain, and took the calf, and burned it
with fire, and ground it to dust, and strewed it on the water, and made
the children of Israel drink it. And Moses came into the entrance of the
camp and cried: Come to me, all who belong to Jehovah. Then the
descendants of Levi gathered round him. Take everyone his sword at his
side, he said to them; go from one gate of the camp to the other, and
slay every man his brother, his friend, and his neighbour. And there
fell on that day about 3,000 men of the people.

On the next morning Moses said: Ye have sinned a great sin; I will go up
to Jehovah, perhaps I can appease him for your sin. And Jehovah said to
Moses: Hew two stone tables like the others, and be ready in the
morning, and appear before me on the top of the mountain. And Moses was
there with Jehovah forty days and forty nights, and ate no bread, and
drank no water, and he wrote on the tables the ten commandments. Then he
came down with the two tables of the law in his hand, and told the
people the commandments which Jehovah had given him, and the laws; and
the people answered: All that Jehovah has commanded we will do. Then
Moses built an altar and twelve pillars for the twelve tribes. And the
young men slew burnt-offerings and thank-offerings, and the half of the
blood Moses sprinkled on the altar, and with the other half he sprinkled
the people, and said: This is the blood of the covenant which Jehovah
makes with you over all laws.

Then Moses set up the tent of the assembly for a sanctuary of Jehovah,
that He might dwell in their midst, as Jehovah had commanded, with
planks of acacia wood on silver feet, and fastened them with silver
bars; and on them he placed a cover of woven cloth of byssus, of a
purple colour, and over this a second roof of red sheep-skins and
seal-skins, and divided the tent by a curtain of blue and red purple,
and carmine, and byssus, with cherubs woven upon it. And in the tent
behind the second curtain he placed the ark of the law, as Jehovah had
commanded, of acacia wood, overlaid with pure gold, and placed the law
in the ark. Then Moses made a table of acacia wood, overlaid with pure
gold, and placed bowls of pure gold upon it for the drink-offerings, and
laid the sacrificial bread upon the table. And he made a candlestick of
pure gold, with seven lamps, three on the one side and three on the
other side of the candlestick. Then he made the altar of incense of
acacia wood, overlaid with gold; and the altar of burnt sacrifice of
acacia wood, as Jehovah commanded, and overlaid it with copper; and made
the curtains for the court and the poles for the curtains of copper. The
Israelites brought what was necessary for the erection and adornment of
the shrine, and gave their nose-rings, ear-rings, seals, and ear-drops.
And Moses made Aaron and his sons priests, and anointed the altars and
all utensils with holy ointment, and sanctified the fire on the altar,
and offered burnt-offerings. But two sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
brought strange fire before Jehovah; then fire went forth from Jehovah
and consumed them, and they died before Him. And the glory of Jehovah
filled His habitation, and the cloud covered the tent of assembly; and
when the cloud rose, the children of Israel set forth, and by night
there was fire in the cloud.

In the second year after the exodus from Egypt, in the second month, on
the twentieth day of the month, the cloud rose from the dwelling of the
law, and the children of Israel set forth on their march out of the
desert of Sinai, from the mountain of Jehovah, and they went three days'
journey, and the cloud halted in the wilderness of Paran. And Jehovah
bade Moses send men to search out the land of Canaan--one for each tribe
from among the leaders. And from Ephraim Moses sent Joshua the son of
Nun; and from the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh. Then the
twelve princes set forth at the time of the first grapes, and came to
Hebron and to the valley of Eshcol, and there cut a bunch of grapes and
a vine, and carried them on a pole between two; and they also took of
the pomegranates and the figs. After forty days they returned, and said
to the people: The land into which you sent us flows with milk and
honey, and these are its fruits. But the people is mighty, and their
cities are large and fortified, and Amalek dwells in the land to the
south, and the Hittites, and Jebusites, and Amorites dwell on the
mountains, and the Canaanites dwell by the sea and on the side of
Jordan. And Caleb said: We will go up and overpower them; but the others
said: We cannot go up against that people, for they are mightier than
we; and the sons of Israel cried: Why should we fall by the sword, and
our wives and children fall into the hand of the enemy; is it not better
to return to Egypt? Then Jehovah said to Moses: All those who have
murmured against me shall not enter into the land wherein I have lifted
up my hand to cause you to dwell. Your bodies shall lie in the desert,
save Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua, the son of Nun; and your
children shall pasture their flocks in the desert forty years: forty
years shall my face be turned from you. And Moses told these words to
the children of Israel. But the Israelites ventured to rise up and went
to the heights of the mountains on the way towards Atharim. But the
Amalekites and Canaanites who dwelt on the mountains came down and smote
them, and scattered them as far as Hormah.

And Korah of the tribe of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram of the tribe of
Reuben, and two hundred and fifty of the foremost men, heads of families
and officers of the community, assembled themselves against Moses and
Aaron, and said: Why do ye lift yourselves up against the people? And to
Moses they said: Is it not enough that thou hast led us out of Egypt, to
slay us in the desert? Wilt thou also make thyself a ruler over us? But
the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up. On the next morning
the people murmured in the assembly against Moses and Aaron, and said:
Ye have slain them. But Jehovah said to Moses: Go out from this company;
I will destroy them suddenly. Then the plague began. At Moses' command
Aaron took the censer of incense and offered incense to purify the
children of Israel; and he stood between the living and the dead, and
the plague was stayed. But there died fourteen thousand and seven
hundred.

The children of Israel came into the wilderness of Sin, and Moses sent
messengers to the king of Edom, saying: Let us pass through thy land; we
will go along the highway, and turn neither to the right hand nor to the
left. But Edom went to meet them with mighty hosts and a powerful hand,
and Israel retired before him, and went from Kadesh to Mount Hor, and
from Mount Hor to the reed-sea. Then the people became impatient on the
way, and murmured against Moses, and Jehovah sent the serpents, the
saraphs, among the people, and many died. Then the Israelites saw that
they had sinned, and Moses prayed for the people and made a serpent of
copper, and set it up on a pole, and all who were bitten by the serpents
and looked upon the image of copper were saved. From the reed-sea the
Israelites went again to the north, towards Oboth and Beer, to the well
which the princes dug. Then Israel sang: "Rise up, O fountain, meet him
with songs; O well which the princes dug, which the nobles of the people
hollowed out with their sceptre and their staves." And from Beer they
went to Bamoth, and from Bamoth to Pisgah, which rises over the desert.
And Sihon, king of the Amorites, who dwelt in his city at Heshbon,
gathered all his people and went to meet Israel in the desert, and came
towards Jahaz, and strove with Israel. Then Israel smote him with the
edge of the sword, laid waste the land, and took the cities. And Israel
sang: "Fire went forth from Heshbon, and flames from the city of Sihon;
we shot at them, we laid waste the land to Nophah, we burnt it with
fire to Medeba." Then the Israelites turned and went up against Og, the
king of the Amorites of Bashan, who was at Ashtaroth Karnaim, and smote
him at Edrei, and his sons and all his people, and his cities were
taken, and not a fugitive escaped. From Bashan Israel went southwards,
and encamped in the plains of Moab at Shittim; and they began to commit
whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and served Baal Peor. And Phinehas,
the grandson of Aaron, pierced with his spear Zimri, a captain of the
tribe of Simeon, as he lay with a Midianitish woman, and slew both with
one thrust through the belly. And Jehovah said to Moses: Go up to Mount
Abarim and see the land which I have given to the children of Israel,
and when thou hast seen it, thou shalt be gathered to thy people. Take
Joshua, the son of Nun, and lay thy hand on him, and place him before
Eleazar the priest (the son of Aaron), and before all the people, so
that all may obey him; and Eleazar shall inquire of Jehovah for him, and
as he commands he shall go out and in. And Moses did as Jehovah
commanded. And the sons of Reuben and Gad said to Moses: The land which
Jehovah has smitten before Israel is a land for flocks, and thy servants
have flocks; and to them, and half of the tribe of Manasseh, Moses gave
the land of Gilead. And Moses went up from the plains of Moab to the top
of Pisgah, over against Jericho, and Jehovah caused him to see the whole
land from Gilead to Dan, and from Jericho to Zoar. And there Moses died,
a hundred and twenty years old. But his eyes were not dim, nor had his
strength forsaken him. The Israelites mourned for Moses thirty days in
the plains of Moab, and henceforth there was no prophet in Israel like
Moses; and to this day no man knows the grave of Moses.

In those portions which deal with the abode and fortunes of the Hebrews
in the desert, the two texts were less closely combined, and the
contradictions are more numerous, than in the other parts. The two
narratives are interpolated each into the other, and the additions of
the reviser are more prominent than elsewhere. An ancient record,
embodied in the first text, gives a list of the places where the
Israelites pitched their tents between Egypt and the Jordan. The
statements do not agree with the narrative in its present condition. In
the first text the Midianites manifestly dwell to the east of the
Jordan. It represents the Israelites as taking vengeance upon them,
because they had seduced Israel to a heathenish ritual; first by the act
of Phinehas, the grandson of Aaron, whose seed in consequence received
"the everlasting covenant of the priesthood," and then by the war which
cost the Midianites a vast booty of sheep, oxen, asses, and thousands of
prisoners.[650] In the Ephraimitic text the Midianites dwell on Sinai;
hither Moses fled to the Midianites from Egypt; he married the daughter
of the priest of the Midianites, and stands in most friendly relations
with them. This text represents the seduction of the Israelites as the
work not of the Midianites, but of the Moabites; and subsequently
narrates the victories over the Moabites of Heshbon and Bashan. How the
first text described the conquest of the land of Gilead we cannot any
longer ascertain; that it dealt with the subject is beyond
question.[651]

The setting up of the golden calf at Sinai is inconceivable in the
connection in which the narrative places it. While Jehovah's glory is
visible on Sinai, and proclaims itself in thunder and lightning, would
the people, and Aaron at their head, have required an image of God, and
offered prayer to it? When after the death of Solomon the ten tribes
founded their independent kingdom Jehovah was worshipped among them in
the form of a bull, in contrast to the worship of the kingdom of Judah.
To stigmatise this worship, wherein priests of the family which claimed
to be derived from Aaron may have taken part from the first, as
objectionable, the prophetic revision has interpolated the adoration of
the golden calf and the punishment of such idolatry; and from this the
second ascent of Sinai by Moses came into the narrative. The account of
the saraphs and the setting up of the brazen serpent belongs to the
Ephraimitic text.[652] At Jerusalem there was a serpent of brass, which
was thought to have come down from Moses.[653]

It was the fixed belief of the Hebrews that it was only by the immediate
help of Jehovah that their forefathers had been able to escape the power
of Egypt. And this was not the only thing done for their fathers; they
had afterwards gained abodes to the east and west of the Jordan, and
from the wilderness they had come into a land flowing with milk and
honey. Here, also, the help of Jehovah had been shown forth mightily for
his people, against the old and powerful cities, and the mountain
fortresses of Canaan. Obviously Jehovah had delivered his people out of
Egypt, in order to give them this beautiful and rich land for a
dwelling. But why had he not at once led them thither? Why did the
Israelites remain so long in the miserable wilderness? The
Israelites--so the first text explains this delay--received the account
of the spies with fear. This cowardly generation, therefore, must die
out. We saw above that the Hebrews reckoned the length of a generation
at forty years, and so the first text puts the sojourn in the desert at
forty years. We shall see below that this period is too short by some
decads of years. Moses and Aaron also did not reach Canaan, because, as
the first text says, "they sinned against Jehovah at the water of
strife, at Kadesh, in the wilderness of Sin," because "they rebelled
against his command at the water," an obstinacy which cannot be any
longer found in the revised narrative of this occurrence.[654] If Joshua
and Caleb are exempted from this decree, if they alone reach Canaan, it
was certain that Joshua had undertaken and carried out the attack upon
Canaan, that Caleb conquered Hebron and subjected the surrounding
district; his descendants were living there even in David's time in
princely wealth.

In the desert also Jehovah had taken care of his people; he had not
allowed them to perish there; he had sent quails and given them manna.
Even now long lines of quails pass over the Syrian steppes and the
wilderness of Sinai, and in the neighbourhood of Firan, manna, i.e. the
juice running from the branches and leaves of the tamarisk, is still
gathered.[655] Nor had Jehovah allowed water to fail in the midst of the
desert. Moses changed a bitter spring into sweet water. The story rests,
no doubt, on the name of the spring. Marah means bitter. At another
spring of the name of Meribah, _i.e._ strife (here Jehovah bade the
rocks give water), the rebellion of Moses and Aaron is said to have
taken place. The well of Beer, which the princes dug, cannot be any
other than the well of Beer Elim, _i.e._ the well of the strong,[656]
and the song which tradition connects with this place (p. 473) is
certainly very old, if not contemporary.

The law made known to Moses on Sinai forms the main portion of the
second, third, and fourth books of the Pentateuch. It not only contains
the fundamental moral rules, the ordinances of the law of family and
blood-feud, and the rubrics for the national worship; it is rather a law
for the priesthood, given in systematic detail, which fixes their
position, rights, and honours, the dress of their office, and the fees
for the sacrifice--a wide collection of regulations for the ritual of
sacrifice, descending into the smallest minutiæ, the place of worship,
the instruments of sacrifice, the celebration of festivals, and the
arrangement of life in the future dwellings of the tribes. Could tribes
wandering in the desert have made rules for the celebration of the
festivals of sowing, of harvest, and of the vintage? Could they have
settled what part of the produce of the field should be given to the
priests, and how they should deal with the fallow time of the seventh
year of rest, and the reversion of the alienated land in the year of
Jubilee? Could dwellers in tents make regulations about receiving the
stranger in their gates, about cities of refuge and cities of the
Levites? And even if this had really taken place, how are we to explain
the fact that whole groups of arrangements for worship and life which
these laws prescribe were demonstrably not in existence among the
Hebrews in the centuries following their wandering? Laws are never
created except in connection with definite circumstances; no lawgiver
can anticipate the relations which the future will bring into
existence, and answer, _à priori_, the questions which will then arise.

It is therefore beyond doubt that views and tendencies of later
development and the results of a long course of growth have been
transferred to early times, the times of the exodus from Egypt. Those
early days had been an era of original piety, and the time of the exodus
had been a period in which the God of the fathers had guided and led
them with a mighty hand, in which he had announced to them his will
directly and without deception. The condition of religious service and
life, therefore, which was held to be the true and proper kind must have
been prescribed in those early days and have existed then; the ideal
after which men were to strive, and in the pursuit of which every
hindrance was to be removed, must have already existed in those days of
direct divine guidance. Thus ordinances and usages which arose
successively after the settlement in Canaan, were amalgamated with older
customs and rules, and united into one system, which seemed to the
priests the necessary system, appointed by God and pleasing to him. The
position which the first text ascribes to Aaron, and which the laws
attached to that text, give to the priests and Levites the prominence of
a centralised, rich, and even splendid ritual, and of a single place for
the worship of Jehovah, display the tendency which was active in the
priesthood, to concentrate the worship of Jehovah on a single spot, and
to obtain power in the state for the chief priests. The gorgeous
tabernacle erected near Mount Sinai with the portable altars for burnt
sacrifice and incense, the implements of sacrifice and the candlestick
of seven branches, can only have been taken from the tabernacle erected
by David, and afterwards from the temple of Solomon and its glory, the
sacred pattern of which ought to be recognised in the movable sanctuary
already erected by Moses on Mount Sinai. At the same time the rich
adornment of this pattern by the voluntary offerings of the Israelites
proved how ready the nation was at that time to honour their God and
dedicate their property to him. For these descriptions there was a
historical foundation in the fact that the Israelites had carried their
national sanctuary, the sacred ark, the Ark of the Covenant, into the
desert, that it had been placed under a movable tent, and before the
tent the heads of the tribes and the nation had gathered for sacrifice
and counsel. In the position of Aaron and his family we have a pattern
which brings clearly into light the attributes and advantages, the
rights and honours, which belonged to the chief priests and priests in
contrast to the Levites or servants of the temple. The fearful
punishments which awaited offences against ritual and neglect of the
priestly rules were strongly marked. Even two sons of Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, die because they approach Jehovah with unconsecrated fire; and
when the Levite Korah, and Dathan and Abiram of the tribe of Reuben,
rebel against Moses and Aaron, they were swallowed up by the earth, and
Jehovah smites the people who follow them.[657] It is the ideal picture
of the priesthood, and arrangement of the Church, which those laws
exhibit, and transfer to that mighty time when Jehovah spoke to the
Israelites through Moses.

The intention of the Israelites in the exodus from Egypt could not at
first go further than the attempt to escape from the dominion of Egypt,
and resume the old free life in the desert. That the line of march at
first attempted to pass along the western shore of the reed-sea, and
reach the south of the peninsula of Sinai, in order to get as far as
possible from Egypt, place the whole length of the protecting arm of the
sea between the emigrants and Egypt, and reach the pasture lands of the
apparently friendly Midianites, corresponds to the situation. Nor can it
in any way surprise us that the Amalekites, as the Ephraimitic text
states, opposed the Hebrews, _i.e._ contested the possession of the
pasture-lands and oases of the wildernesses of Shur and Paran, with the
new-comers. The Israelites obtained the victory. So they arrived at
Sinai, the sacred mountain of the wilderness of Sin. Between the two
bays with which the sea encloses this peninsula, that mountain rises, a
naked granite ridge, with five steep peaks, united into a mighty crown,
above the plateau of sandstone which occupies the whole peninsula. The
height is 8,000 feet, and the wild and rugged mass overlooks in sublime
solitude the broad and desert flats in the north, and the waves of the
sea in the south. The beautiful oasis at the foot of the mountain (Wadi
Firan) affords nourishment for a large number of men and beasts.[658] On
the old and sacred mountain the Israelites might believe that they
approached nearer to their deity; that here thanksgiving and sacrifice
for their happy deliverance could best be offered to him. Then the
Israelites would pasture their flocks on the slopes and glades of the
peninsula. But they may have found but scanty food beside the flocks of
the Midianites, and the security from Egypt would be greater, if they
removed to a greater distance from that country. On the southern
borders of Canaan, at Kadesh and Hormah, they sought better pastures.
Yet they were driven back, and pursued as far as Hormah. After this
misadventure, the Israelites, according to the Ephraimitic text,
besought the king of Edom to allow them a peaceful passage through Edom,
"on the road of the king, they would not turn either to the right or the
left." Hence the defeat must have been a serious one.[659] The object of
this march through Edom can only have been to find new pasture-lands in
the Syrian steppes beyond Mount Seir on the east. The wide extent of the
Syrian desert would certainly supply sufficient pastures, and the
distance from the Nile was a good protection from Egypt. As the Edomites
refused the demand, and showed themselves prepared to resist the march
by force of arms, the Israelites did not venture to give battle; they
preferred to retire to the south, and make a long circuit round the
territory of the Edomites, by marching through the whole length of the
valley of Arabah southward to Elath, as far as the north-east point of
the reed-sea. From this point they passed to the other side of Mount
Seir, past Punon and Oboth, towards the Arnon, which falls into the Dead
Sea. If they could at first maintain themselves on the east, in the
desert, the uplands on the left bank of the Jordan were far better than
the steppes of the desert. The arms of the Israelites were here more
fortunate than on the other side of the Dead Sea. The Amorites of
Heshbon, eastward of the Dead Sea, were defeated at Jahaz, and their
cities taken. The song which celebrates this victory (p. 473) is old,
and above suspicion. From this point, out of the newly-conquered land,
from the top of Pisgah--a mountain near Heshbon--Moses is said to have
seen the promised land. A second victory over the Amorites lying to the
north beyond the Jabbok, the people of Edrei and Ashtaroth Karnaim,
opened ample pasture-lands to the Israelites, and also some well-watered
valleys on the wide plateau to the east of the Jordan. Their territory
now reached from the Arnon northwards to the Jarmuk. Here the nation
remained; the greater part tended their flocks as hitherto, the lesser
part applied themselves to agriculture in exceptionally fruitful
valleys.

Though a peaceful race of shepherds and unused to arms, the Hebrews had
bidden defiance to the strong arm of Pharaoh; with bold resolution they
had successfully delivered themselves from a cruel slavery; and had
preserved their freedom, their national character, and their religion.
Beyond the borders of Egypt and the reed-sea, the lively perception of
their liberation, and the recovery of their ancient mode of life, and of
the visible protection of their God, must have aroused a mighty impulse,
especially in their great leader. It was a moment of great elevation.
Together with the valley of the Nile, they had left behind the gods of
Egypt; and they returned to the worship of their old deity with
strengthened and deepened feelings. Thus on Sinai Moses could inculcate
the exclusive worship of Jehovah--a worship without images--and the
consecration of the seventh day.[660] These were commands consciously
and diametrically opposed to the multitude of Egyptian gods, the variety
of their forms and modes of worship, and the times of their festivals.
In connection with these commands, and the customs of sacrifice in use
among the Israelites, regulations were given for purification, and
rules, telling how to proceed at the erection of altars, at
purifications and expiations, at burnt-offerings, thank-offerings, and
offerings of corn and meal; rules which were preserved and developed in
the family of Aaron.[661] Even for the establishment of this ritual the
contrast to the Egyptian was not without influence. This contrast was in
fact so strong that what was best in the Egyptian religion--the belief
in the existence of the soul after death, and in its awaking from death
to a new life, was not adopted by the Israelites. Of the care shown to
the corpses of the dead in Egypt, we find no trace.

We saw what a long series of moral rules were set up in Egypt. For his
people Moses collected the foundations of moral and religious law into a
simpler, purer, deeper, and more earnest form, in the Ten
Commandments.[662] In connecting the moral law with the worship of
Jehovah, its inseparable foundation, and setting it up with passionate
earnestness as the immediate command of the God of Israel, Moses
imparted to his people that character of religious earnestness, and
ethical struggling, which distinguishes their history from that of every
other nation. With the decalogue were connected the regulations for
peace in the nation, the law of the family, and the avenging of blood.
One who curses father or mother must be put to death. One who strikes
father or mother must be put to death. One who strikes a man so that he
dies must be put to death. One who has slain a man without intention, by
misadventure, must flee to the altar. But if anyone sins against another
so as to slay him by craft, thou shalt take him from the altar that he
may die. If men strive with one another, and one is injured, thou shalt
give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, foot for foot, burn
for burn, bruise for bruise. If any man strike his man-servant or his
maid-servant with his staff, and they die under his hand, vengeance must
be taken. If thou buyest a Hebrew servant, he shall serve six years, and
in the seventh he shall go free. The long service in Egypt was still
held in lively remembrance.[663]

Just as the ordinances of Moses for religious worship again brought into
prominence the ancient customs of the Hebrews, purified and developed
them, so his regulations for peace, for revenge, and expiation, for
injury to the person, and theft, were connected with ancient customs of
the children of Jacob, which could hardly have been entirely forgotten
in Egypt. As Moses attached his law to the old customs, permeating them
with the depth of his own ethical point of view, a certain stock of
sayings must have been formed, which were preserved and further
developed by the decisions of the heads of the tribes, the leaders of
families, and the elders and the priests. The code in Exodus is taken
from an old document, though apparently first inserted by the
revision.[664]

The Israelites had risen from a tribe into a nation, which stood in need
of organisation when it was no longer under Egyptian dominion. This
arrangement must be founded upon the connection of families and races,
on respect for the tie of blood, and reverence for age. No other
political division was known but community of family and descent.
Affinities and races were in existence which carried back their origin
to one patriarch, they followed the head of the oldest family, from whom
the rest were derived, or thought that they were derived, and usually
obeyed his decision. Some of these races carried their pedigree back to
Jacob and his sons. After the pattern of these connections, and by
adopting and adding to them, the whole nation was brought into ties of
relationship. Strangers and families without a name must have here been
in part allotted to the affinities already in existence, and partly
formed into new corporations, and new affinities, so that in the total
there were some seventy groups of families. Those derived from the old
stocks, who carried their origin back to the same son of Jacob, formed
together a large community, or tribe, and were accustomed to obey the
nearest descendant of the patriarch, the son of his oldest son, from
first-born to first-born, and thus the head of the oldest family in the
whole community, as their tribal prince and leader by birth. In the same
manner, also, the new groups of families became amalgamated into tribes,
and older families were put at their head as chiefs of the tribe, in
such a manner that from three to ten groups of families formed a
tribe.[665] Thus twelve tribes were formed. Even the nations most
closely allied to the Hebrews, the Nahorites, and Ishmaelites, were
divided into twelve tribes; the Edomites were apparently divided into
sixteen. The tribes already in existence were derived from definite
progenitors, the sons of Jacob; and also for the new tribes one of the
sons of Jacob, the number of whom has thus been fixed, was allotted as a
patriarch. Reuben, Simeon, and Judah, were Jacob's eldest sons, borne by
Leah his first wife in lawful marriage. From these three the oldest
groups were derived. With the tribes of Issachar and Zebulon families
were connected, whose antiquity did not go so far back, and thus
Issachar and Zebulon were held to be younger sons of Jacob by the same
wife. The tribes of Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher, were not considered
equally pure; perhaps because additional families had been incorporated
in them: hence, as we saw, their progenitors are said to be the sons of
Jacob by his handmaids. The tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin,
are marked as of later origin by the fact that they are carried back to
Jacob and Rachel; and if Joseph begot his sons Ephraim and Manasseh with
the daughter of the priest of Heliopolis, this leads to the conclusion
that the families incorporated into the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh
had grown up in Egypt, and had Egyptian blood in their veins. But
Ephraim was at the same time the strongest tribe, which in numbers and
bravery outstripped the rest, and the later origin is compensated by the
importance of Rachel and Joseph. The Egyptian element which Ephraim and
Manasseh introduced among the Hebrews cannot have been of any
importance, for neither the language nor the ideas of the Hebrews
incorporated elements from Egypt. Only a few external touches in the
dress of the priests can be carried back with certainty to Egyptian
influence. Of the two sons of Joseph, Manasseh is the elder, Ephraim the
younger. Hence the groups of families incorporated into the first, must
have been considered the older, or the tribe of Manasseh must at one
time have had precedence of Ephraim, which may have been the case about
the time of Gideon.

If in the place of Joseph, the eleventh son of Jacob, two grandsons are
adopted into the number of the patriarchs, room is made by excluding
Levi, a son of Jacob's first marriage, from the series of the tribes.
Tradition places him among the oldest sons, between Simeon and Judah.
But the tribes deduced from this ancestor won no territory like the
rest: they were scattered among the other tribes. We may assume that the
priestly families, who from antiquity had discharged the sacred duty at
the main seats of worship, the race of Kohath (to which belonged the
sons of Aaron), with the priestly families of the other altars (the
races of Gershom and Merari), and the families of the temple-servants
connected with them, were not combined into a tribe till a late period.
The name "Levi" may mean "bound," _i.e._ bound to a shrine, and hence a
temple-servant. The separation of this tribe from the rest, and its
dedication to the sacred service, is brought forward with great emphasis
in the first text, which was composed from the point of view of the
priests. Jehovah takes the Levites in the place of the first-born of
Israel, and this same text allots to the Levites forty-eight cities of
Canaan which they never possessed, and never inhabited either
exclusively or in preponderant numbers.[666] But while in this text the
adoption of the Levites by Jehovah, and their "possession of the
sacrifice" in the place of a territory, is regarded and extolled as a
privilege of this tribe, we found above (p. 439) that an old poem spoke
of the "division of the Levites in Jacob and their scattering in Israel"
as the punishment of the sin which their progenitor had once committed.
Hence we must assume that the groups of races, to which the foremost
families of the priests belonged, once formed a connected tribe like the
rest, and the breaking up of this tribe was brought about after the
settlement in Canaan by causes unknown to us.

FOOTNOTES:

[650] Numb. xxiv. 13, c. xxxi.

[651] Numb. xxxii. 4; Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 90.

[652] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 292; Nöldeke,
"Untersuchungen," s. 86.

[653] 2 Kings xviii. 4.

[654] Numb. xx. 1-13, 22-29; Deut. xxxii. 48-52.

[655] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 245.

[656] Isaiah xv. 8.

[657] On the mutual interpolations of the narratives, both in regard to
the rebels and the mode of their destruction, see Nöldeke,
"Untersuchungen," s. 79, 131.

[658] Lepsius, "Briefe," s. 341.

[659] Numb. xxxiii. 40 (the first text); Numb. xxi. 1-3, and xiv. 44,
45, belong to the second text; De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 291;
Deut. i. 44; Joshua xii. 14; Judges i. 17. Cf. Nöldeke,
"Untersuchungen," s. 85, on the tenacity with which unsuccessful battles
are remembered in these districts.

[660] Nöldeke explains Exod. xx. 23-26 and xxi. 1-xxiii. 19, as in
substance and in part a composition of great antiquity,
"Untersuchungen," s. 51.

[661] Nöldeke ("Untersuchungen," s. 62 ff.) proves that Levit. i.-xxvi.
2, and xxvii., with the exception of a few additions, especially cc.
xviii.-xx. belong to the first text; and De Wette-Schrader
("Einleitung," s. 286 ff.) proves the same for nearly the whole book.
Moreover, he shows at length, pp. 265, 266, that many of the ceremonial
ordinances and the faith of the land in general goes back to Moses, or
the Mosaic times.

[662] The Mosaic origin of the decalogue (Exod. xx. 1-17; Deut. v. 6-21)
is proved in De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 284. The original form
of it, it is true, is no longer in existence.

[663] So the old codex, Exod. xxi. 1-6. The priestly law on the other
hand puts off the liberation till the year of Jubilee, Levit. xxv. 39
ff.

[664] On Exod. xxi.-xxiii. 19, cf. De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s.
285, 286, and Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 51, 63 ff.

[665] Gen. xlvi. 8-27 Numb. ii 3-31; 1 Chron. ii 10.

[666] Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 103, 109, 128.




CHAPTER XI.

THE HEBREW INVASION OF CANAAN.


When the Israelites had delivered themselves from the dominion of Egypt,
they pastured their flocks on the peninsula of Sinai. Afterwards they
wandered further to the north-east into the Syrian desert, and at
length, as the oases in this district were few, and the wells
insufficient, they threw themselves upon the rich uplands on the east of
the Jordan. From the table-land, which they had conquered, they saw
before them the happy valley of the Jordan, the fig-trees and
pomegranates, the vines and green glades in the valleys beyond it. The
sight roused the greater portion of the Israelites to descend into the
valley, and invade the land beyond the river, in order to win settled
abodes where milk and honey were said to flow.

We have already examined the circumstances of Canaan. The Amorites had
destroyed the power of the Hittites; and in conjunction with the
remnants of the Hittites and Hivites, they possessed the land. They
lived separately in the various mountain cantons, under small princes
from thirty to forty in number. But their cities were old and well
fortified; the nature of the land was in favour of defence, and on the
coasts lay the strong cities of the Phenicians and the Philistines. It
was no light undertaking. The Israelites had left Egypt a nation of
peaceful shepherds, but the sixty or seventy years which they
subsequently passed in the desert, and on the uplands beyond the Jordan,
had hardened them and made them into warriors. The successes which they
gained against the Amalekites, the Amorites of Heshbon, and Bashan must
have roused their courage. If they combined in an attack on the isolated
cantons of Canaan, they might hope to become masters even of the
fortified walls, and perhaps they even found assistance among the
Hittites and Hivites, who lived under the oppressive rule of the
Amorites. About the middle of the thirteenth century B.C., the greater
part of the Israelites marched towards the Jordan. Joshua, the prince of
the tribe of Ephraim, led the army. The tribes of Reuben and Gad, and a
part of the tribe of Manasseh, remained behind on the other side of the
Jordan.[667]

The book of Joshua gives the following account of the conquest of Canaan
by the Hebrews: It came to pass after the death of Moses, that Jehovah
spoke to Joshua the son of Nun: Up, cross over Jordan, thou and all the
people, into a land which I will give thee. Then Joshua commanded the
leaders of the people: Go through the camp and say, Make ready your
provisions; in three days ye shall cross the Jordan. When the people
set out from their tents at Shittim, and reached the Jordan with the
priests carrying the ark before them, and the feet of the priests, who
carried the ark, touched the water of Jordan, the water which flowed
from above stood up, and the water which flowed downwards to the Dead
Sea parted from the upper water, till the ark of Jehovah and the people
of Israel had passed over on dry land. And the people encamped at
Gilgal, on the tenth day of the first month, and Joshua made sharp
knives and circumcised the children of Israel, the whole nation that was
born in the desert, and kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the
month at evening in the plain of Jericho. And Jehovah said to Joshua:
See, I have given Jericho and her king into thy hand. Go round the city
for six days, and let seven priests carry seven trumpets before the ark,
and on the seventh day ye shall go round the city seven times, and the
priests shall blow upon the trumpets. And when ye hear the sound of the
trumpets, all the people shall make a great cry, and the walls of the
city will fall down, and the people shall pass over them, every man
straight before him. Joshua fulfilled the command of Jehovah, and when
the people marched round the walls of Jericho for the seventh time on
the seventh day, Joshua said: Cry aloud, for Jehovah has given the city
to you, and it shall be sacred, it and all that is in it, to Jehovah,
and all the silver and gold, and all the vessels of copper and iron
shall belong to Jehovah, and shall go into his treasury. When the people
heard the sound of the trumpets, they made a great cry, and the walls
fell down, and the people went up into the city and took it. And they
set apart all that was in the city from the man to the woman, from the
boy to the old man, from the oxen to the sheep, and slew them with the
edge of the sword.

Then Joshua sent spies to Ai. When they returned they said to Joshua:
Let not the whole people go up; two or three thousand men can smite Ai,
for they are few. Joshua sent three thousand, but the men of Ai overcame
them, and pursued them as far as Shebarim, and smote them on the slope
of the mountain. Then Joshua rent his garments and fell upon his face.
But Jehovah said to him: Israel has taken of the forbidden spoil; the
children of Israel cannot stand before their enemies, if that which is
forbidden is not destroyed from their midst. They must come forth
according to their tribes, races, and houses, and the house, which
Jehovah shall choose, shall come forward man by man. And whoever shall
be found with that which is forbidden, shall be burnt with fire and all
that belongs to him. Joshua caused Israel to come forward, according to
their tribes, and the lot fell on the tribe of Judah, and race of Serah;
and in the race of Serah the lot fell upon the house of Sabdi, and of
the men of the house of Sabdi the lot fell upon Achan, the son of
Charmi. Then Achan confessed that he had taken a beautiful mantle of
Shinar, and 200 shekels of silver, and a bar of gold fifty shekels in
weight, and had hidden them in his tent. And Achan the son of Charmi was
led out "with his sons and daughters, his oxen and asses, his tent and
all that he had, and all Israel stoned them, and they burnt them with
fire, and covered them with stones, and then erected there a great heap
of stones." But Joshua set out towards Ai, with all the people, and
chose 5,000 men of war, and sent them out in the night, and said to
them: Go ye and lie in ambush at the back of the city, between Ai and
Bethel. I and all the people that is with me will draw near towards the
city, and if they come out to meet us, we will fly before them. Then be
ye ready and rise up out of your ambush and set fire to the city. When
Israel went forth towards Ai, the king of Ai came to meet them for
battle; but Joshua turned with his people and fled, and all the people
of Ai pursued them, and left the city open. Then the men in ambush rose,
and set fire to the town; and when the men of Ai looked behind them, the
smoke of their houses rose to heaven; and Israel turned upon their
pursuers and slew the men of Ai, who were between the Israelites on this
side, and the Israelites on that side, so that none remained beside the
king whom they took alive. Afterwards the women and children in Ai were
put to the sword, and of the slain on this day there were 12,000. And
Joshua hanged the king of Ai on a tree till evening. Then they took the
corpse down from the tree, and cast it at the entrance of the gate, and
erected over it a great heap of stones till this day: but the city
remained a heap of desolation.

When the men of Gibeon--a great city like one of the king's cities, it
was greater than Ai, and all the inhabitants were men of war--and the
men of Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim, heard what Joshua had
done, they sent to him, and the messengers put old shoes and clouted on
their feet, and old clothes on their bodies, and took old sacks on their
asses, and patched wine skins, and the bread of their provisions was old
and mouldy. Thus they came into the camp of Israel at Gilgal, and said
to Joshua: We are come from a far country to make a covenant with thee;
behold, the wine skins are torn which we filled new, our bread is dry
and mouldy, our clothes and our shoes are old by reason of the length
of the way. And Joshua made a covenant with them to let them live, and
the princes of the people made an oath with them. But when the children
of Israel set forth from Gilgal, they came on the third day to their
cities. Then Joshua called them and said: Why have ye deceived us and
said, we are far from you. Be ye now accursed, and may ye never cease to
be servants, and drawers of water, and hewers of wood for the house of
my God. Thus he did to them, and saved them from the hand of the
children of Israel that they slew them not.

Adoni-zedec, king of Jerusalem, heard what Joshua had done to Jericho
and her king, and to Ai and her king, and that Gibeon had made peace
with Joshua. He sent to Hoham, king of Hebron; and to Piram, king of
Jarmuth; and to Japhia, king of Lachish; and to Debir, king of Eglon,
and they gathered themselves and went forth, five kings of the Amorites,
and encamped against Gibeon. Then Joshua set forth from Gilgal, and all
the men of war with him. And Jehovah caused the Amorites to flee before
the children of Israel, and Joshua cried: Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon, and thou, moon, in the valley of Ajalon. And the sun stood
still, and the moon waned not, till the people took vengeance on their
enemies, and before this was no day like it, nor after it. And the five
kings fled and hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah; and when it was
told to Joshua, that the kings were hidden there, he said: Roll great
stones before the cave, and set men there to watch it. But do ye halt
not, but pursue your enemies, and smite the rear guard, and let them not
come into the cities. And Israel accomplished the slaughter, and turned
back to the camp at Makkedah. And Joshua caused the five kings to come
forth out of the cave, and called to the leaders of his warriors and
said: Come forward and set your feet on the necks of these kings. And
when this had been done, Joshua smote the kings, and hanged them on five
trees, and they hung on the trees till evening. Then Joshua commanded to
take them down, and they cast them into the cave, and laid great stones
on the mouth of the cave till this day.

Then Joshua took Makkedah, and Libnah, and Lachish, and smote them with
the edge of the sword, and let no fugitive escape in Makkedah, Libnah,
and Lachish; and did to the kings of Makkedah and Libnah as he had done
to the king of Jericho. Horam, king of Gezer, went out to help Lachish,
but Joshua defeated him and went from Lachish against Eglon, and from
Hebron against Debir; and he set apart Eglon, and Hebron, and Debir, all
the souls that were therein, and smote the kings of Hebron and Debir
with the edge of the sword, and returned to the camp at Gilgal.

But Jabin, king of Hazor, gathered together the kings of Madon, Shimron,
and Achshaph, and the kings of the north, who dwell towards the
midnight, on the mountain and in the plain, and they encamped a great
nation as the sands on the shore of the sea in multitude, with chariots
and horses on Lake Merom. Then Joshua with all his men of war fell upon
them suddenly, and smote them, and pursued them as far as Sidon, and to
the valley of Mizpeh, and lamed their horses, and burned their chariots
with fire. Then he took Hazor, the chief city of all these kingdoms, and
smote their king with the sword, and all the souls that were therein;
and all the booty of these cities, and all the cattle, the Israelites
took for spoil. For a long time Joshua made war with all these kings,
and he expelled the Anakites from the mountains of Hebron, from Debir
and Anab, from the mountain of Judah and the mountain of Israel; with
their cities he destroyed them. And there was no city which surrendered
peacefully to the Hebrews except that of the Hivites of Gibeon.

Joshua was old and stricken in years, and Jehovah said to him: Divide
this land among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh. And
Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chiefs of the
tribes of the children of Israel divided the land by lot. And the lot of
the children of Judah was in the south, as far as the wilderness of Sin
and the brook of Egypt, and in the east as far as the Dead Sea and to
the end of Jordan, and in the north the border was Gilgal and the valley
of Ben Hinnom, and Beth Shemesh, and the western border was the Great
Sea. And the lot came forth for the children of Joseph, and their
borders on the south ran from the water of Jericho over toward
Bethhoron, and from Bethhoron toward the sea. The land toward the south
fell to Ephraim, and the land toward the north to Manasseh. And the
whole community of the children of Israel were gathered together at
Shiloh, and there they set up the holy tent, and Joshua spake to the
seven tribes, whose possessions were not yet allotted: Choose three men
out of each tribe to write down the land, for I will cast lots for you
here at Shiloh before Jehovah. And so the men went and wrote down the
land according to the cities, in seven parts, and Joshua cast lots at
Shiloh, and divided the land to the children of Israel according to
their divisions. But Jehovah commanded Joshua that he should speak to
the children of Israel, and tell them to fix the cities of refuge, to
which the homicide was to fly who slew a man in misadventure, in order
that the elders of the city might receive him, and if the avenger
pursued him, they were not to deliver him into his hand till he had been
brought before the people. And they consecrated Kadesh, and Shechem, and
Hebron, and Bezer, and Ramoth in Gilead, and Golan. And the chiefs of
the tribe of the Levites went to Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son
of Nun, and asked for cities to dwell in, and land for their cattle; and
the Israelites gave them forty-eight cities and their land for their
possession. And Joshua gathered the elders of Israel, and his leaders
and judges, and gave law and justice at Shechem; and he died one hundred
and ten years old, and they buried him in the land of his possession at
Timnath-serah, on the mountain of Israel; and the bones of Joseph, which
the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, they buried at Shechem,
on the piece of the field which Jacob bought (pp. 411, 418), and the
children of Joseph kept the place for a possession. And Eleazar, the son
of Aaron, died, and they buried him in Gibeah, the city of Phinehas, his
son, which was given to him on the mountain of Ephraim.

The conception of the covenant between Jehovah and Israel, and of the
arrangement of law, as it existed in complete perfection in later times,
dominates the two texts of the Pentateuch and the book of Joshua, no
less than the prophetic revision of these texts (p. 386), and could not
but exercise an influence on the narrative of the conquest of Canaan,
_i.e._, the fulfilment of the prophecies. Even in the first text it is
the direct command of Jehovah which leads Joshua to set out towards the
Jordan; and it is the priestly ideas of this text which come out
strongly in the feast of the passover and the circumcision before the
conquest of Jericho. The miraculous passage of the Jordan is a
repetition of the passage through the reed-sea. This narrative belongs,
as it seems, to the second text, and is further amplified by the
reviser.[668] The overthrow of the walls of Jericho, when the priests
had blown their trumpets and the people raised the war-cry, is briefly
narrated in the first text; here also the details are the work of the
reviser. If the walls of Jericho were mounted at the first onset,
tradition might well recount the story that they were broken down before
the war-cry of Israel; and from this the farther account could be
framed. The law of the priests ordained: "All that is devoted
(_cherem_), what every man dedicates to Jehovah from all that is his,
from men, or cattle, or the field of his possession, that cannot be
bought or redeemed. All that is devoted is holy to Jehovah."[669] Joshua
had devoted Jericho and all that was in the city to Jehovah. But one of
the nation had taken something for himself from this devoted spoil. The
punishment comes upon the whole people, and the first attempt on Ai is a
failure. The more complete is the victory when that transgressor and his
house is stoned to death. By this narrative the observance of the
command was deeply impressed on all. When it was found long after the
settlement in Canaan what pernicious results for life, morals, and
religious worship followed from the fact that portions of the old
population were allowed to remain among them, it appeared to the
priestly mind that the due regulation and purity of the Hebrew nature
required the extinction of the earlier inhabitants, and even before
they took possession of Canaan, Jehovah must have given the command to
make neither covenant nor marriage with the Canaanites, to destroy their
altars and images, and to extirpate the nation.[670] Without doubt, at
the time of the conquest a considerable number of the old population
were not only driven out, but were put to death; and it is certain that
when cities were taken by storm their inhabitants "from man to woman,
from child to old man," were slain with the edge of the sword; but a
systematic extirpation did not take place. Of the four cities of the
Hivites--Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim--Gibeon, two
good hours north-west of Jebus, was the most important. These four
cities joined the Hebrews against the ruling Amorites,[671] and combined
with them. The craft of the Gibeonites, by which they succeeded in
deceiving Joshua about their Canaanitic descent, is intended to explain
the sparing of such an important part of the old population in
opposition to the pre-dated command of extirpation. And if to this is
added the fact that Joshua, when he had once sworn to grant their lives,
made them hewers of wood and drawers of water for the whole community,
this, no doubt, rests on the fact that at a later time king Saul, "in
his zeal for Israel," intended to extirpate all the Gibeonites, and did
extirpate part, "though Israel had sworn to them;" that David favoured
them, but Solomon made "all that was left of the Amorites, Jebusites,
Hittites, Perizzites, and Hivites bond-servants to this day."[672] The
king Adoni-zedek of Jerusalem, who, startled by the fall of Jericho and
Ai, and "the peace which Gibeon had made with Joshua," brings about the
league of the Amorite princes in the south against the invasion of the
Hebrews, belongs to the prophetic revision; in the first text the
Jerusalem of later times is still the city of the Jebusites. The
description of the great battle and of the miracle at Gibeon against the
Amorites belongs to the second text. The miracle is founded merely on
the poetical expression in the Israelite song of victory, "the sun stood
still and the moon stayed till the people had punished their enemies,"
which meant no more than that the day had been long enough, and the moon
had shone long enough, to allow them to achieve a great defeat of the
Amorites, and to pursue them a considerable distance. After this day
Joshua is said to have taken Hebron, Debir, Libnah, and Lachish, to have
conquered the kings of Northern Canaan in a great battle, and to have
gained their cities, including Hazor. This narrative with its
particulars, according to which the conquest of Canaan took place in
consequence of the battle of Gibeon and a second great victory of the
Israelites at Lake Merom, belongs to the revision,[673] and is open to
serious difficulties. In the first place we are told that Joshua, for a
long time, had fought against all the kings; but Hazor, the abode of
Jabin, which Joshua had attacked, we find shortly after as again the
abode of Jabin. A large number of places which Joshua is said to have
taken are subsequently not in the hands of Israel, and both in the Book
of Joshua and the Book of Judges mention is made of separate battles of
the tribes among which the battle about Hebron, which the tribe of
Judah obtained, is the most conspicuous.[674]

It was the view of both texts that the whole land was promised and
plighted to the Hebrews. They did not dwell on particulars in order to
bring out more definitely and clearly the community of the tribes, the
divinely-arranged and righteous division of the land among them. After
the war, in the traditional account, had continued about five years, and
Joshua was eighty-five years old, he and Eleazar, the son of Aaron,
divide by lot the territory gained on this side of the Jordan. The first
text here defines the portion of the tribe of Judah with special
minuteness, the second dwells upon the importance of the tribe of
Ephraim. Last of all, the forty-eight cities, on an average four in each
tribe, were set apart for the Levites. Of these forty-eight thirteen are
mentioned as allotted to the families of the priests of the tribe of
Levi. These lie entirely in the territory of Judah, Simeon, and
Benjamin, while the ark of the covenant evidently was placed at Shiloh
in the territory of Ephraim. In the neighbourhood of this sanctuary,
therefore, the priests must have had their dwellings. On the other hand,
Nob, which in Saul's time was called a city of the priests,[675] was not
among these thirteen cities. And among the thirty-five cities which are
said to have been given to the Levite ministers, several are found which
were not conquered by the Israelites, such as Taanach, Gezer, Jibleam,
and Nahalal. Of the thirteen towns of the priests and the six cities of
refuge, which were partly cities of the priests and partly of the
temple-servants, Hebron, the first-mentioned, was, as has been already
remarked, conquered later on, and not by Joshua. These arrangements have
arisen out of ideals; there never were Levite cities in Israel, and the
right of asylum in the cities of refuge was not recognised till a later
time. Even if we set aside the sacerdotal scheme for the distribution of
the land, we cannot repose complete confidence in an apparently ancient
enumeration of the conquered kings and cities given in the Book of
Joshua. Allowing that it belonged to one of the two original texts, it
has been altered and interpolated.[676] Cities are mentioned as
conquered which are not mentioned in the preceding narrative; others are
quoted as subjugated which evidently remained long after in the hand of
the Canaanites, like Taanach and Megiddo.[677]

Adopting, therefore, as our principal basis the accounts which are in
existence about the battles of the various tribes, we shall have to
assume that the course of affairs was somewhat of this kind. The two
tribes of Reuben and Gad and the greater part of the tribe of Manasseh
preferred to remain on the east of the Jordan. The fertile depression
round Jericho naturally formed the first object of attack. Jericho was
taken. But the destruction of the city can hardly have been completely
carried out; for not very long after we find it again inhabited.[678]
That the Hebrews after taking Jericho established themselves at Gilgal,
and from this place undertook flying campaigns against the cities of the
Amorites, are statements which, as to the fact, need not excite any
doubts. The covenant with the neighbouring four cities of the Hivites,
which was appealed to even in the time of the kings, proves evidently
that these cities united with the Israelites and fought on their side
against the Amorites. In order to defend Gibeon against the Amorites,
who wished to punish their defection, the great battle against the
Amorites took place near this city, which is proved to be a fact by the
old song of victory. By this overthrow the power of the Amorites seems
to have been broken. Their defence henceforth is confined to each of the
cities maintaining itself. But the attacking party also lost their
unity. The various tribes of the Israelites attempted to conquer the
districts which pleased them; and the campaign of conquest broke up into
local conflicts. The tribe of Ephraim, accompanied by the greater part
of the remaining tribes, turned northwards to the green heights and
shady valleys of Shiloh and Shechem. Here, on "the mountain of Ephraim,"
the Ephraimites settled; the sacred ark was placed at Shiloh, and here
at Timnath-Serah, "which he had sought from the people and had
obtained," Joshua took up his abode, and built the city and dwelt
therein. Round the fortress of the prince the best part of the tribe
must have settled. On the same mountains lay the portion of land which
belonged to the priest of the sacred ark, Phinehas, the grandson of
Aaron.[679] Near a sanctuary at Shechem, under the oak, the priests and
elders of the tribe assembled for the administration of law and justice.
The Ephraimitic text represents the sons of Joseph as saying to Joshua
that they were a numerous people, and that Mount Ephraim was too narrow
for them. Joshua replied, Go up to the forest, and hew out for
yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and Rephaims, if Mount
Ephraim is too narrow for you. They answered: The mountain will not be
gained by us; there are iron chariots among all the Canaanites who
dwell in the land of the valley at Beth-shean, and in the valley of
Jezreel. But Joshua said: The mountain shall belong to thee. It is
forest, hew it down, and the outgoings shall belong to thee. Thou shalt
drive out the Canaanites.[680]

The tribes of Judah and Simeon turned to the south after the battle of
Gibeon, and settled in the mountain land of Hebron; here they succeeded
in acquiring a considerable territory. But it was only by slow degrees,
through long and severe battles, that the two tribes advanced. The tribe
of Judah first overcame the king of Bezek, and took him prisoner. From
the king as from the rest of the prisoners the thumbs and the great toes
were cut off. Then the king of Bezek said: Three score and ten kings
having their thumbs and their great toes cut off gathered what fell from
my table; now I have been requited.[681] Of more importance was it that
Caleb the son of Jephunneh established himself in Hebron, the old
metropolis of the land of the south (p. 346), and independently
subjugated the surrounding territory.[682] To the man who should conquer
Debir he promised his daughter Achsah to wife, and Othniel his brother's
son gained the city and the woman. From Debir the tribe of Judah pressed
on to the south, and conquered Zephath and Hormah. "And Jehovah"--so we
find it in the Book of Judges--"was with Judah, and he took the mountain
and possessed it, but could not drive out the inhabitants of the low
ground because they had chariots of iron."[683] The inhabitants of the
low ground are the Philistines on the coast, whose power was undoubtedly
superior to that of the tribes of Judah and Simeon. The Simeonites, a
tribe by no means numerous, settled themselves under the tribe of
Judah, and had to be content with the least fertile districts on the
southern border.

The tribe of Manasseh, so nearly related to Ephraim, had in part
remained beyond the Jordan; the other part settled under the
Ephraimites, on their northern border in the region from Hadad Rimmon to
the mouth of the Kishon, but they were unable to gain the mastery over
the greater number of the cities of the Canaanites situated in this
district. The little tribe of Benjamin had settled round Gibeon, perhaps
immediately after the battle, between Bethhoron and Jericho, on the
southern border of Ephraim. The tribes of Issachar and Zebulon, Asher
and Naphtali were the last to acquire settled abodes. Issachar conquered
the heights of Tirzah and Gilboa, as far as Tabor; Zebulon planted
himself between the right bank of the Kishon and the lake of Kinneroth,
in the region of Jokneam and Beth Arbel. Westward of the lakes of
Kinneroth and Merom lay the tribes of Naphtali and Asher; the first was
nearest to the lake of Merom, in the district of the northern Kadesh;
Asher was further to the west, on the borders of the land of Tyre. The
tribe of Dan attempted to gain the spurs of the mountain westward of
Benjamin towards the sea. For a long time it encamped against the
Amorites and the northern cities of the Philistines, Ekron and Gath, but
though occasionally supported by Ephraim and Judah, it never gained
territory enough for its numbers. When the others had long been fixed in
settled abodes, a part of the Danites, finding it impossible to advance
to the coast, set out to the north, and took the city of Laish,
northward of Kadesh and the land of Naphtali, which belonged to the
Sidonians,[684] gave it the name of Dan, and here, as they had become
more warlike than the rest, owing to their prolonged battles, maintained
the northernmost point of the land of Israel.

The conquest was completed. In the middle of the thirteenth century B.C.
the Israelites had broken the power of the Amorites in Canaan, and
gained a considerable territory (about 10,000 square miles), of which
one-half lay on the nearer and the other on the farther side of the
Jordan. But this land, divided by the Jordan, was neither a whole united
from within, nor protected by natural boundaries from without. As the
Israelites immediately after their first successes became again
disunited, and the attack became less powerful at every step in advance,
the Canaanites maintained themselves in independence, in separate
valleys or heights difficult of approach, and in strong fortresses.
Remnants of the Canaanites remained everywhere among and between the
Israelites. Beside the Benjamites the Jebusites (a tribe of the
Amorites) maintained themselves, and at Gibeon, Kirjath-jearim,
Chephirah, and Beeroth were the Hivites, who had made peace with the
Israelites. In the land of Ephraim the Canaanites held their ground at
Gezer and Bethel, until the latter--it was an important city--was
stormed by the Ephraimites.[685] Among the tribe of Manasseh the
Canaanites were settled at Beth Shean, Dan, Taanach, Jibleam, Megiddo
and their districts,[686] and in the northern tribes the Canaanites were
still more numerous. It was not till long after the immigration of the
Hebrews that they were made in part tributary.[687] The land of the
Israelites beyond the Jordan, where the tribe of Manasseh possessed the
north, Gad the centre, and Reuben the south as far as the Arnon, was
exposed to the attacks of the Ammonites and Moabites, and the migratory
tribes of the Syrian desert, and must have had the greater attraction
for them, as better pastures were to be found in the heights of Gilead,
and the valleys there were more fruitful. To the west only the tribe of
Ephraim reached the sea, and became master of a harbourless strip of
coast. The remaining part of the coast and all the harbours remained in
the hands of the powerful cities of the Philistines and the Phenicians.
No attempt was made to conquer these, although border-conflicts took
place between the tribes of Judah, Dan, and Asher, and Philistines and
Sidonians. Such an attempt could only have been made if the Israelites
had remained united, and even then the powers of the Israelites would
hardly have sufficed to overthrow the walls of Gaza, Ascalon, and
Ashdod, of Tyre, Sidon, and Byblus. Yet the invasion of the Israelites
was not without results for the cities of the coast: it forced a large
part of the population to assemble in them, and we shall see below how
rapid and powerful is the growth of the strength and importance of Tyre
in the time immediately following the incursion of the Israelites,
_i.e._ immediately after the middle of the thirteenth century. As the
population and in consequence the power of the cities on the coast
increased, owing to the collection of the ancient population on the
shore of the sea, those cities became all the more dangerous neighbours
for the Israelites.

It was a misfortune for the new territory which the Israelites had won
by the sword that it was without the protection of natural boundaries on
the north and east, that the cities of the Philistines and Phenicians
barred it towards the sea, and in the interior remnants of the
Canaanites still maintained their place. Yet it was a far more serious
danger for the immigrants that they were without unity, connection, or
guidance, for they had already given up these before the conflict was
ended. Undoubtedly a vigorous leadership in the war of conquest against
the Canaanites might have established a military monarchy which would
have provided better for the maintenance of the borders and the security
of the land than was done in its absence. But the isolated defence made
by the Canaanites permitted the attacking party also to isolate
themselves. The new masters of the land lived, like the Canaanites
before and among them, in separate cantons; the mountain land which they
possessed was much broken up, and without any natural centre, and though
there were dangerous neighbours, there was no single concentrated
aggressive power in the neighbourhood, now that Egypt remained in her
borders. The cities of the Philistines formed a federation merely,
though a federation far more strongly organised than the tribes of the
Israelites. Under these circumstances political unity was not an
immediately pressing question among the Israelites; but owing to the
dispersion in which they lived, and the open borders of their new
kingdom, the question seriously arose whether they could enjoy in peace
the land they had won. Whatever the weight with which the want of
internal concentration and external repulsion might be felt, whatever
the difficulties arising from the remnant of Canaanites left in the
land, and however unsatisfactory the maintenance of the borders of the
land, these political drawbacks were only so many advantages for the
development of the religious and moral life of the Israelites.

FOOTNOTES:

[667] That the chronological statements in the book of Judges afford no
fixed point for deciding the date of the invasion of Canaan by the
Hebrews is proved by Nöldeke ("Chronologie der Richterzeit"). The
genealogical tables give only six or seven generations down to Eli and
Samuel, and these cannot fill a longer space than of 150 to 175 years.
As Ramses III. whose reign according to Lepsius falls in the years
1269-1244 B.C. fought against the Pulista, Cheta, and Amari, _i.e._ the
Philistines, Hittites, and Amorites, within the first nine years of his
reign (p. 164) without meeting the Hebrews among them, we may assume
that their settlement in Canaan did not take place till after the year
1260 B.C., about the middle of the thirteenth century, B.C.

[668] Cf. Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 95.

[669] Lev. xxvii. 28, 29.

[670] In the form of a vow, Numb. xxi. 1-3, from the second text; in the
form of a command, Exod. xxiii. 32, 33; xxxiv. 12, from the revision.

[671] If the Hivites are counted in 2 Samuel xxi. 22 among the Amorites,
the reason is to be sought in the comprehensive meaning here given to
the name Amorites.

[672] 2 Sam. xxi. 1-10; 1 Kings ix. 20; cf. Joshua xvii. 12.

[673] De Wette-Schrader, "Einleitung," s. 304, 305; Nöldeke,
"Untersuchungen," s. 98.

[674] Joshua xi. 1, 10, 13; xii. 19; xix. 36; Judges iv. 2, 17; 1 Sam.
xii. 9

[675] 1 Sam. xxi. 1-6; xxii. 11-18.

[676] Joshua xii.; Nöldeke, "Untersuchungen," s. 98.

[677] Judges i. 27-30.

[678] Judges i. 16; iii. 13.

[679] Joshua xix. 49, 50; xxiv. 33, both from the first text; Joshua
xvii. 14-18.

[680] Joshua xvii. 14-18.

[681] Judges i. 7.

[682] Judges i. 12-15, 20; Jesus, 46, 11.

[683] Judges i. 19.

[684] Joshua xix. 47; Judges xviii.

[685] Judges i. 22, 29.

[686] Judges i. 27.

[687] Judges i. 30-35.




CHAPTER XII.

THE NATIONS OF ASIA MINOR.


The peninsula of Asia Minor is a table-land of about 750 miles in length
by 400 in breadth, lying between the Black Sea, the Ægean, and the
Mediterranean. This table-land reaches its highest level in the south;
here run along the Mediterranean, from east to west, parallel ranges of
mountains, the chain of Taurus, and under the snow-clad heights lie
green Alpine pastures, while the slopes are filled with the most
beautiful wood. Under these mountains on the sea we find here and there
narrow and hot but fruitful plains, which are separated into several
sharply-divided districts by the spurs of the Taurus, which run athwart
them into the sea. Northward of the peaks of Taurus the soil gradually
sinks to the Black Sea, so that while the southern coast possesses only
short streams, with the exception of the Sarus and Pyramus, the larger
arteries of the land empty into the Black Sea--the Iris, the Halys, the
Billæus, the Sangarius, and the Rhyndakus. These rivers take their
course, partly through rocky districts, partly through extremely
fruitful valleys. The centre of the land, from the middle course of the
Halys to the Sangarius in the west, is taken up with a wide treeless
desert, the great Salt-steppe, the edges of which are formed by a mass
of volcanic craters, by deep ravines and large lakes. Further to the
west the waters streaming from the table-land find their way to the
Ægean, down a series of mountain terraces, so that the valleys of the
Mæander and the Hermus are at the same time the highways which connect
the coast with the interior. These terraces sometimes advance to the
western shore, with steep limestone rocks and precipitous promontories
running out into the bright blue sea; at other times they approach the
coast with softer outlines; in one place broader, in others narrower
plains are left, which, owing to the great fertility of the soil, are
covered with orchards and vineyards. Further inland, on the rising
heights, is a splendid forest of oaks, firs, and planes, broken by
mountain pastures, over which rise the jagged rocks of Ida, Tmolus,
Messogis, and Latmus; in the far distance the snow-capped peaks of
Taurus fill the horizon. On the western coast the proximity of the ocean
softens the heat of summer and the cold of winter; and the combination
of sea and mountain, of ocean breezes and upland air, the connection
opened to the table-land on the east by the Hermus and Mæander and the
calm sea on the west, which forms a passage to a number of adjacent
islands--make these districts on the shore of the Ægean Sea the favoured
home of civilisation in Asia Minor.

On the north-east, where the peninsula joins the broad mountain land of
the isthmus between the Black Sea and the Caspian, around the sources of
the Euphrates and Tigris, on the course of the Araxes, which falls into
the Caspian Sea, and the high table-land of Lake Van, lay the home of
the Armenians. According to Strabo, their customs were like those of the
Medes, who were the neighbours of the Armenians, to the east of the
Lake of Urumiah, and at the mouth of the Araxes. And if, according to
the same evidence, the Armenians paid the greatest reverence to the
goddess Anaitis,[688] the goddess Anahita held a prominent position in
the worship of the nations of the table-land of Iran. Moreover, even in
modern Armenian, the affinity with the Iranian languages is predominant;
and there is therefore no doubt that the Armenians belong to the
Indo-Germanic stock, and are a nation of Aryan descent.

On the southern slope of the group of mountains which they possessed
south-east of the Lake of Van, on the upper course of the Great Zab, lay
the district of Arphaxad, with which we have already become acquainted
from Semitic sources; south of the lake lay the Carduchi, whom the later
Greeks call the Gordyæans and Gordyenes; but among the Armenians they
were known as Kordu, among the Syrians as Kardu.[689] These are the
ancestors of the modern Kurds, a nation also of the Aryan stock, whose
language is even nearer to those of Iran than the Armenian. Westward of
the Carduchi, at the confluence of the two streams of the Euphrates, we
again meet with a Semitic race.[690] The north-western slope of the
Armenian mountains, as far as the Phasis and the Black Sea, was the home
of the Muskai of the Assyrian inscriptions, the Mesech of the Hebrews,
the Moschi of the Greeks. Beside them, further to the west, on the
coast, were the Tabal of the Assyrians, the Tubal of the Hebrews, the
Tibarenes of the Greeks; westward from these, as far as the mouth of the
Iris, were the Chalti of the Armenians, the Chalybians (Chaldæans) of
the Greeks. Of the origin and language of the Moschi and Tibarenes we
know nothing further; the genealogies of the Hebrews placed Mesech and
Tubal among the sons of Japhet.

The territory of the Armenians round Lake Van lies 5,000 feet high. The
only extensive plain among the mountains which are the home of the
Armenians is the valley on the middle course of the Araxes, which is
separated from the district of the Van by the range of the Masis
(Ararat). The highest peak of this range, a mighty cone of dark rock,
veiled by wide glaciers, rises to a height of 16,000 feet. Only the
valley of the Araxes allowed agriculture on any extensive scale; it only
brought forth abundant produce. Other more protected and warmer
depressions, though small in extent, on the southern slopes, permitted
the culture of the vine. The inhabitants of the heights followed a
pastoral life, and the mountain pastures supported splendid horses and
mules.

Moses of Chorni (Khorene), who wrote the history of Armenia in the years
460-480 of our era,[691] tells us as follows:--Japhet, the third son of
Noah, had a son Gomer; Gomer's son was Thiras; Thiras had a son Thorgom;
Thorgom's son Haik, together with his son Armenak and all his family,
emigrated from Babylon to the plain of Airarat, in order to escape the
tyranny of Belus, the king of Babel. This plain Haik then left to
Cadmus, his grandson, the son of Armenak, and himself, with Armenak,
passed on to the west, and founded Haikashen. But when the army of the
Babylonians marched out to attack Airarat, Haik came to the assistance
of his grandson, and defeated Belus on the shore of Lake Van. Then
Armenak marched eastwards from Haikashen into the plain at the foot of
the Aragazd, where at a later time Armajis, the son of Armenak, built
the city of Armavir. The son of Armajis was Amasiaj, and of Amasiaj,
Arast. The grandson of Arast was Aram, who undertook distant campaigns,
and subjugated Syria and Cappadocia to his rule. With him Ninus, king of
Assyria, out of respect to his power and bravery, made a league. Aram's
son and successor was Araj, whose beauty inflamed Shamiram (Semiramis),
the queen of Assyria. When Araj resisted her inclinations, Shamiram, at
the head of her army, invaded Armenia, but, before the battle, she bade
her soldiers spare Araj. The Armenians were defeated, and in spite of
the command of Shamiram, Araj was slain in the _mêlée_, and she
attempted in vain to resuscitate the corpse by magic arts. Then Shamiram
caused builders to come from Assyria to Armenia, and with the help of
these she erected a splendid city, Shamiramakert (city of Semiramis), on
the shore of the lake of Van, in order to dwell in the cool air of the
mountains during the heat of the summer months; and the throne of
Armenia she gave to Cardus, the son of Araj. But he rebelled against
her, fought without success, and, like his father, fell in battle. At
last the Medes rebelled against Shamiram, and after defeat she fled to
Armenia. On the shores of Lake Van she was overtaken by her pursuers,
and when she had thrown her necklace and her ornaments into the water,
she was slain. Then her son Zames (Ninyas) ascended the throne of
Assyria, and for twenty-six generations the descendants of Cardus were
vassals of the kings of Assyria.[692] After these twenty-six kings,
whose names are given by Moses, when Nineveh had fallen, Barbakis
(Arbaces) the Mede, crowned Baroir king of Armenia, and his descendants
ruled as independent princes. The ninth successor of Baroir was Tigran
(Tigranes). He conquered Azdahag (Astyages), the king of the Medes, and
pierced him through with his lance in the battle. Owing to Tigran's
bravery and victory, the prince of the Persians became the lord of the
Medes.[693]

We can trace the elements out of which this account has arisen. The
names Japhet, Gomer, and Thiras are borrowed from the Hebrew scriptures,
from the genealogy of the Japhetic nations in Genesis; but the order of
succession is altered. To the same book belongs Thorgom, the son of
Thiras, and father of Haik; in the Hebrew his name is Torgarmah.
Torgarmah was the name of Armenia among the Syrians;[694] the Hebrews
appear to have used the word to denote the district of Van. The native
name of the Armenians was Haikh, and of the land, Haiastan. From these
names is derived Haik, the son of Thorgom, the progenitor of the race.
The emigration from Babylon is no doubt an invention arising out of some
early contact, out of the trade of Armenia with Babylonia, and intended
to give the Armenians a share in the splendour of that ancient centre of
the civilisation of Hither Asia, from which, as a fact, they derived
such important elements of culture as their system of writing. Eastward
of Lake Van Haik defeats the Babylonians, for here lay Haik's fortress;
in Armenian Haikabjerd, _i.e._ fortress of the Armenians, and
Hajots-dsor, _i.e._ valley of the Armenians. Northeast of this lake lies
the canton of Harkth, _i.e._ the fathers, the canton of the
fathers;[695] and in this, on the Eastern Euphrates, is Haikashen,
_i.e._ Haik's building, which Haik is said to have founded, and where
his grave was reported to be. As the name of Haik, _i.e._ the name of
the nation, clings especially to the neighbourhood of Lake Van, so are
the names of his supposed successors, his son Armenak, and grandsons
Cadmos and Amajis, attached to the district of Airarat, to Mount
Aragadz, and the city of Armavir. The land of Airarat, _i.e._ the
fruitful plain, on the middle course of the Araxes, was, as we have
heard, the first object of the immigrants, who must have come, not from
the south, as the story represents, but from the east, from Media, and
must have reached the valley of the Araxes from the shore of the Caspian
Sea. As Haikh is the name by which the Armenians called themselves, so
Armenak is obviously formed from the name Armina, which the Medes and
Persians gave to the Armenians. Cadmus, the son of Armenak, is inserted
in the story; and has been borrowed, as the form of the name shows, from
Grecian sources, perhaps to represent the Semitic population in the
South of Armenia. That in this learned construction of the Armenian myth
the eastern, and not the southern, district of Armenia is given to
Cadmus, is due, no doubt, to the fact that the Semitic word _kedem_
could hardly have any other meaning than that of "the East." Armenak's
grandson and great-grandson, Amasiaj and Arast, represent respectively
the mountain chain of Masis and the river Araxes; in old Armenian the
name of the latter was Eras'ch.[696]

The division of the two centres of the Armenian land and Armenian
life--the land in the East and the land in the West, the land of Ararat
on the Araxes, and the district of Van--is strongly marked in this
tradition, and not less so in the Assyrian inscriptions and the
scriptures of the Hebrews. The first text of the Pentateuch represents
Noah's ship as landing on Mount Ararat, and this text or the second
mentions Togarmah beside Gomer. The prophet Ezekiel speaks of the horses
and mules which came from Togarmah, the land of mountain pastures, to
Tyre.[697] The Assyrian inscriptions mention the land of Van (_mat
vannai_) beside the land of Urarti, _i.e._ Ararat; each is ruled by its
own prince.

King Aram represents the land of Aram, the Aramæans, whose neighbours
the Armenians were, and with whom they came into frequent contact. The
oldest historical recollections of the Armenians might perhaps go back
to the times when the kings of Assyria made an inroad into their
mountains and reduced their princes to tribute and obedience. But when
Moses of Chorni tells us of the meetings of Aram, Araj, and Cardus with
Ninus, Semiramis, and Ninyas, of the twenty-six kings who governed under
Assyrian dominion, and of the liberation of the land by Arbaces, these
supposed names of the Assyrian riders are enough to prove that the
narratives were framed upon the accounts of the Greeks, especially the
Greek chronographers.

On the other hand, the story of the city of Semiramis on Lake Van is
grounded upon the Assyrian images and ruins, which are still found in
various parts of Armenia, especially at Van, Bitlis, Karkar, Egil, and
Achlat, as also upon monuments of the Persian kings, and Xerxes in
particular; but no doubt it is due in the greatest extent to the
monuments of the native princes, of whom inscriptions are in existence
belonging to the end of the seventh and the sixth century B.C. Later
historians knew nothing of these princes, and were unable to read the
inscriptions. The long list of Armenian kings in Moses of Chorni does
not contain a single name of the Armenian princes mentioned in the
inscriptions of the Assyrian kings, or in the native inscriptions of
these princes.

The narrative of king Tigran appears to be of an earlier date than the
rest of the material from which Moses of Chorni compiled his history of
Armenia in the older period. Tigran is said to have ruled over Armenia
at the time of Cyrus, with whom he entered into a league; he overcame
Astyages (Azdahag) of Media in battle, and slew him in single combat.
The first wife of Astyages and a number of his children, together with
other captives, Tigran then conducted to Armenia, and there he settled
them in the neighbourhood of Koghten. In the songs of the people of
Koghten the descendants of Astyages are "allegorically" spoken of as the
descendants of the dragon, "for Azdahag," Moses adds, "signifies a
dragon in our language."[698] Hence it is clear that the Armenians
claimed the glory of having conquered the Medes and overthrown their
supremacy. And if they called the descendants of Astyages the
descendants of the dragon, they obviously contracted the old cloud-demon
of the Avesta, Azhi-dahaka, into Azdahag, and confounded him with
Astyages. Xenophon in his romance of Cyrus calls Tigranes the son of the
king of Armenia, and represents him as paying the most considerable
services to Cyrus. It may have been the case that Xenophon in his march
through Armenia, when he crossed the snowclad heights of this mountain
region, and entered the mud huts of the mountaineers, and was
hospitably entertained by them with barley-wine, _i.e._ with beer, heard
the name and deeds of Tigranes.[699]

The kings of Assyria at an early period turned their arms to the North.
On the Zibene-su, the eastern source of the Western Tigris, the likeness
of Tiglath Pilesar I. (1130-1110 B.C.) has been found engraved on the
rocks at Karkar. The inscription tells us that he had overcome the land
of Nairi, _i.e._ in all probability the land of the rivers (Euphrates
and Tigris), and that he had defeated the Muskai (p. 512), who had not
paid their tribute for fifty years, and had invaded Kumukh (Commagene).
More than 200 years later, Tiglath Adar II. (889 to 883 B.C.) caused his
image to be hewn in the rocks here beside that of the first Tiglath
Pilesar. Tiglath Adar's successor, Assurnasirpal (883-859 B.C.), made
repeated campaigns against the Nairi, destroyed 250 of their towns, slew
many of their princes, and set up his image beside those of Tiglath Adar
and Tiglath Pilesar. In his tenth campaign he took Amida (Diabekr) on
the Tigris. Below this city, at Kurkh, there is a second image of this
king. His successor also, Shalmanesar II. (859-823 B.C.), fought against
the Nairi, set up his image at the source of the Tigris, and in the year
843 defeated the king of Urarti. In the year 831 his troops again
defeated a king of Urarti, of another name than the first; in the year
828 B.C. they laid waste the land of king Udaki of Van, and in the
following campaign fifty places in Urarti were burnt. Bin Nirar III.,
king of Asshur (810-781 B.C.), marched twice against the district of
Lake Van, and seven times against the Nairi; he boasts that he has taken
possession of the land of the Nairi throughout its whole extent.[700]
Shalmanesar III. (781-771 B.C.) led his army six times against Urarti.
Then Tiglath Pilesar II. (745-727 B.C.), in the year 742, defeated king
Sarda, or Sarduri, of Urarti, with his confederates; in the year 728
B.C. removed Vassarmi from Tubal, and placed Chulli on the throne in his
stead. In the time of Sargon of Assyria (722-705 B.C.), Aza, the prince
of the land of Van, who, like his predecessor Iranzu, was a tributary to
Assyria, was murdered. His brother Ullusun, whom Sargon put in his
place, combined with Urza, prince of Ararat, and the prince of Mount
Mildis against Assyria. Sargon was victorious; Ullusun submitted (716
B.C.); but Urza maintained himself in Ararat, and although Sargon boasts
to have burnt fifty of his townships, he combined with Urzana of
Musasir, _i.e._ probably of Arsissa on Lake Van, with Mita, prince of
the Moschi, with Ambris, prince of Tubal, the son of Chulli, whom Sargon
had allowed to succeed his father on the throne of the Tibarenes, and to
whom at the same time he had entrusted the sovereignty over Cilicia, and
had given his daughter in marriage.[701] The confederates were defeated;
Ambris was carried prisoner to Assyria, a part of his nation were
transplanted to Assyria, and Assyrians settled at Tubal in his place.
Mita submitted. Arsissa was captured; 20,000 prisoners, their treasures,
the gods Haldia (?) and Bagamazda (?), with the holy vessels, were
carried away. When Urza perceived this, he took away his own life (714
B.C.).[702] In the seventh century Esarhaddon of Assyria had to fight
against the Cilicians, the Tibarenes, and the Mannai; the last name
seems to denote the Armenian district of Minyas, on the upper course of
the Eastern Euphrates, of which the chief city was Manavazakert;
Manavaz, the son of Haik, is said to have built this city.[703] Against
the Mannai, or the Minni of Ezekiel, Esarhaddon's successor,
Assurbanipal (668-626 B.C.), also directed his weapons. In the course of
this war Asheri, the prince of the Minni, was slain by his own
dependents, and his son Ualli submitted; the previous tribute of the
Minni was raised by thirty horses; and Mugalla, king of Tubal, and
Sandasarmi of Cilicia voluntarily submitted to Assurbanipal.[704]

The mountains of Armenia, as these narratives prove, were divided into
several principalities. The Assyrians first attacked the land to the
south of the high mountain-range, _i.e._, in the first instance the land
of Ararat, the most powerful of these Armenian principalities. On either
side of the mountain, in the basin of Lake Van, and in the valley of the
Araxes, the Armenians made a vigorous resistance, so that the obedience
of the Armenian chieftains never seemed to be secured for any length of
time. In spite of this resistance, the civilisation of the Assyrians
exercised great influence on the Armenians. This is not merely shown in
the adoption of the system of cuneiform writing on the part of the
Armenians; Sargon caused the capture of Arsissa to be represented in his
palace at Khorsabad. If these reliefs are true representations, the
style of architecture and the plan of the Armenian temples were not
essentially different from the Assyrian. The altars also, the ornaments,
and the weapons appear to be similar.[705] On the other hand it would
admit of no doubt that the Armenians, in spite of this influence,
retained the worship of their Iranian gods without any foreign
admixture, if the name of that Armenian deity Bagamazda, _i.e._ the
great god, were read correctly. That deity would at the same time afford
a new proof that the deities of Iran were worshipped in Armenia also.
Strabo, as already (p. 512) remarked, gives an account of the worship of
Anaitis, the water-giving goddess, the Anahita of the Iranians, among
the Armenians; and the name of this goddess is found, in the form
"Anaid," in the cuneiform inscriptions of the Armenian princes.
Unfortunately these inscriptions, which mainly belong to the land of
Van, have not as yet been sufficiently deciphered. The names of the
kings, from which they come, are read as Bagridur, Isbuinis, Minuas,
Argistis II. and Bagridur II.[706] These kings reigned successively;
each calls himself the son of his predecessor. An older Argistis of
Ararat is mentioned after the time of Urza in an inscription of Sargon,
king of Assyria, belonging apparently to the year 708 B.C. The
inscriptions of the kings of Armenia from the first to the second
Bagridur are filled with the wars which they carried on, the numbers of
the slain, of the captives, the cattle in the spoil, the towns and
temples destroyed. As Asshur is mentioned in the inscriptions of
Argistis II., and in those of his successor Bagridur II. a war against
Babylon is narrated,[707] these two kings must have been contemporaries
of the last ruler of Assyria, Assuridilili (626-606 B.C.), and
Nebuchadnezzar II. of Babylon (604-568 B.C.), and their three
predecessors contemporaries of Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and
Assurbanipal.

The central plain of the table-land of Asia Minor, from the valley of
the Halys and the great salt lake to the Cadmus and the Mysian Olympus,
north-westwards as far as the coasts of the Propontis, was inhabited by
the Phrygians. According to Herodotus the Thracians asserted that the
Phrygians had once dwelt in their land under the name of Briges. Hence
they had passed through Thrace to Asia, though a part, who still
preserved the name of Briges, had remained behind in Thrace. Of those
who arrived in Asia, some passed still further to the east; and the
Armenians were colonists of the Phrygians.[708] In Strabo also the
Phrygians are immigrants, and come from Thrace.[709] In any case the
Bithynians, who were settled on the lower course of the Sangarius from
the mouth of this stream westward as far as the Bosporus, were of
Thracian descent; they are said to have emigrated from the Strymon to
Asia.[710] On the other hand, the Phrygians themselves maintained that
they were not an offshoot from the Thracian Briges, but the Briges in
Thracia had emigrated from them.[711] If the affinity of the Armenians,
the Phrygians, and Thracians is established, the Phrygians must be
considered in the right. These migrations could not have proceeded from
the Strymon, they must rather have taken place from the east to the
west, from Armenia to Thrace, and the Thracians rather than the
Armenians were the last link in this emigration. As the modern science
of language finds Indo-Germanic roots in the slight remains of the
Phrygian language which have come down to us,[712] we must assume that
the progenitors of the Phrygians and Thracians passed from the Armenian
mountains in the east towards the west. The ancestors of the Phrygians
remained on the table-land of Asia Minor, those of the Thracians went
further to the north-west, towards Bithynia, over the Bosporus, which
the Greeks named after the Thracians; and beyond the strait they
inhabited the land under the Balkan from the Black Sea to the shores of
the Adriatic. The character of the language of the Thracians and
Illyrians, remains of which are preserved in Rumanisch and Albanian,
places it in the Indo-Germanic family.

The Phrygians are said to have been a very ancient nation.[713]
According to the accounts of the Greeks, the legends of the Phrygians
began the history of their country with Gordius and Midas. Gordius, it
was said, was a poor farmer, who possessed only two yoke of oxen. At
that time the Phrygians were divided by factions, and in order to
restore peace, the deity commanded that they should elect as king the
man whom they first met on a waggon on the way to the shrine of Zeus.
Then they met Gordius on his waggon and greeted him as king. Gordius
built the city of Gordium at the confluence of the Scopas and Sangarius,
and dedicated in the temple of Zeus on the citadel of Gordium the
chariot which carried him to the throne. After Gordius's death the
throne descended to his son Midas, to whose lips, when a boy, ants had
carried grains of corn. Midas is said to have founded the city of
Gordiutichus in the south of the land, on the borders of Phrygia, and
Ancyra in the north: at Pessinus on the slope of Mount Agdus he built a
temple to the goddess of Phrygia and established the sacrifices.[714] He
was the richest king who ever lived. Everything that he touched turned
to gold. Once he bathed in the Pactolus, and ever since the sands washed
down by the river became sands of gold. When Pan blew his shepherd's
pipe, and Apollo touched his lyre, Midas preferred the music of Pan. In
revenge, Apollo caused asses' ears to grow upon Midas, and he covered
them with a tall cap. But the barber of Midas knew the secret, and told
it into a pit; and some rushes grew in the pit, and whispered "Midas has
asses' ears."[715]

The gold of Midas and his power of changing everything into that metal
comes from the Greeks, whose legends desired to celebrate and explain
the ancient wealth of the kings of Phrygia. From the same source are the
asses' ears and the whispering rushes. The use of the pan's pipe, though
not of the shepherd's pipe, was learnt by the Greeks through their
colonists in Asia Minor from the Phrygians. The reed (or flute) was
called "eleg" among the Armenians: its notes first accompanied the
Elegies of Callinus of Ephesus, and Archilochus of Paros, to which it
gave the name. Among the Greeks many judges, and those by no means of
the least reputation, gave the most decided preference to the music of
the cithara, the lyre of Apollo, over the flute. In the same feeling
which prompted this judgment, the want of taste in finding the tones of
the flute more beautiful than those of the cithara is visited by a
punishment which at the same time is intended to explain the origin of
the tall Phrygian cap. The reeds belong to a brook in the vicinity of
Celænæ in Phrygia, which the Greeks called "the flute-spring"
(Aulokrenê) because the reeds growing on the shores were used as
wind-instruments. There is another story in which the Greeks have
expressed the contrast between the quiet and composed tones of the
cithara, and the wild music of the Phrygian flutes--the Phrygian
harmonies to which they ascribed the power of rousing the feelings into
a passionate excitement of pain or delight.[716] The music of the flute
was introduced into choric poetry in the first half of the sixth century
by Polymnestus of Colophon, and Sakadas of Argos. Among the Phrygians,
Marsyas, a faithful and chaste companion of their national goddess, was
the genius of flute-music.[717] A brook which flowed into the Mæander
through the city Apamæa Cibotus, in the neighbourhood of Celænæ, was
named after Marsyas. The Greeks had a story that their god Apollo had
overcome with his cithara the flute-player of the Phrygians, and had
flayed him in punishment for his presumption in entering on the contest.
At Celænæ a bottle of Marsyas was exhibited, on which the story of the
flaying of Marsyas may have been founded.[718]

After removing the fictions and additions of the Greeks, the
characteristic trait of the Phrygian story still remains, that their
monarchs arose out of the agricultural class, that grains of corn were
carried into the lips of the son of the first ruler, and that the king
of Phrygia loved the pan's pipe of the shepherds. Elsewhere also the
respect of the Phrygians for the agricultural life is brought into
prominence. Nicolaus of Damascus tells us of a law of the Phrygians by
which the slaughter of the ploughing ox, or the theft of agricultural
implements, was punished with death.[719] In the fourth century B.C. the
waggon of Gordius was still standing on the citadel of Gordium. The yoke
was bound so fast to the pole with the bark of dog-wood--the knot is
reported to been tied by Gordius himself--that it was said in Phrygia
that the man who should untie this knot would rule over all Asia. The
name Gordius should apparently be traced back to the Armenian "gords,"
i.e. labour, or "day labour."[720] That side by side with these traits
the national tradition ascribed the erection of the ancient cities and
temples, the building of Gordium, Gordiuteichus, and Ancyra to the
earliest princes, is only natural. The names of the cities Manegordum
(near Ancyra) and Midaëum also point to these.

The Phrygians obeyed a dynasty which saw its ancestors in the kings
Gordius and Midas, and called themselves alternately by these names. The
first king of whom we have any more definite information was Midas, the
son of Gordius, who ascended the throne of Phrygia in the year 738 B.C.
according to the date of Eusebius. His wife was Damodice, the daughter
of Agamemnon, the king of the Greek city of Cyme, who is said to have
been a woman distinguished by beauty and wisdom.[721] The seat on which
he used to dispense justice, a work well worth seeing, as Herodotus
says, he consecrated at Delphi. When Phrygia was attacked by the first
great invasion of the Cimmerians, he took away his own life by drinking
bull's blood (693 B.C.).[722] Of a third Midas, who reigned apparently
about a century later, we learn that his tomb was adorned with the image
of a maiden in brass, and that a Greek poet composed as an inscription
for this monument the following verses:--

  "I am a maiden of brass,
  I lie on the tomb of Midas;
  While waters flow, and tall trees grow,
    On Midas' tearful tomb I lie.
    I say to every passer by,
  'Here Midas sleeps in earth below.'"[723]

With the descendants of this Midas, Gordius and his son Adrastus, this
dynasty came to an end in the sixth century B.C.[724]

Between Prymnessus and Midaëum (Jazili Kaja and Sidi Ghazi), in the
valley of Doganlu, lie the tombs of these kings, sepulchral chambers,
which are hewn in the perpendicular walls of red sandstone. On the face
of the rock there is no trace of any entrance; and the corpses must have
been lowered down behind the exterior front. The walls of rock are
changed into sculptures, in imitation of the outlines and rudiments of a
light wooden building. In low relief a framework of beams is sketched,
and over this a low-pitched gable rises. Such are the simplest of these
façades, which apparently we must also consider the oldest. Others
display a frieze of palm leaves in the upper field of the framework.
Others again put the figures of animals in the gable, _e.g._ two horses,
between which is an obelisk, and exhibit traces of Hellenic influence,
while another presents a perfect imitation of the Doric arrangement of
pillars. Among these sepulchres may once have been the tomb with the
maiden of brass. The inscriptions found on some, or in the
neighbourhood, are Phrygian, but written in Greek characters. The most
important tomb is that of a more ancient Midas at Kümbet. The façade of
this monument, which is in framework of the Phrygian style, covers about
sixty square feet of the hundred feet of the rock. The space in the
field of the framework is entirely filled up with rectangular ornaments
and a kind of scroll, while the tympanum of the gable is covered with a
key pattern.[725]

Other remarkable remains of buildings are found in Phrygia. Strabo tells
us of a tribe on the borders of Cilicia who lived in the arches and
hollows of the rocks above the fruitful valley which they cultivated;
till conquered by the Romans the tribe was considered invincible, and
Vitruvius remarks that the Phrygians excavated the natural hills, cut
passages in them, and extended the spaces into dwellings as far as the
nature of the place allowed.[726] On the Rhyndakus, in the district of
the ancient Prymnessus, at Beibazar, on Lake Egerdir, to the east near
Iconium, numerous habitations are found excavated in the rocks, so that
it really seems that the Phrygians dwelt in the walls of their
mountains.[727] Lofty walls of rock, thousands of isolated cones, and
some mighty mountain summits are excavated into dwellings, into rock
cities--a task which was rendered easier by the softness of the stone
(peperino and tufa). Steep and at times wonderfully jagged rocks,
overhanging picturesque valleys, are chiselled out for one or two
hundred feet in height in such a manner that several galleries of
habitations lie one upon the other. These are lighted by openings in the
front, and connected with each other by shafts and staircases: of seats,
hearths, or couches there is no trace whatever--only niches and recesses
are found. Yet in some of the rock cities an advance may be observed. In
these the entrances to some extent exhibit indications of pillars,
architraves, portals, and the like, so that the habitations of this kind
seem to have been built at a later period. The ruins of the cities of
the Phrygians, the remains of Gordium, Midaëum, Pessinus, Prymnessus,
and Ancyra allow us to see the so-called Cyclopian style.[728]

Our knowledge of the religious rites of the Phrygians is extremely
scanty. They are said to have invoked the god Men, or Manes under
various titles,[729] and the names of the cities Manegordum and Manesium
seem to go back to this deity. Whether this is the god whom the Greeks
called the Phrygian Zeus is not clear. The goddess, whom the Greeks
called Rhea or Cybele, Dindymene, Agdistis, after the mountains sacred
to her, is said to have been called Amma by the Phrygians.[730] The
chief home of her rites was that sanctuary on Mount Agdus near Pessinus,
which the first Midas is said to have dedicated to her (p. 525). Here
she was worshipped in a shapeless stone of no great size, not larger
than a man could lift. At the side of her statue in the temple lions and
panthers are said to have stood.[731] Her priests were eunuchs, who
waited on the goddess in gaily coloured vestments. The chief priest at
Pessinus, or Archigallus, is afterwards found holding a princely
position. At the festivals of the goddess, which were celebrated every
year, it was the custom for young men to make themselves eunuchs with a
sharp shell, crying out at the same time, "Take this, Agdistis." Then
they went round the country asking alms in the name of the goddess, and
they were known to the Greeks as "Metragyrtes," _i.e._ "beggars of the
mother;"[732] for the goddess, whose priests were eunuchs, and whose
service demanded the sacrifice of sex, was called by the Greeks the
"Great Mother," the "Mountain Mother," the "Nourishing Earth," the
"Giver of all." She must, therefore, have been regarded as the maternal
power of the earth, the power of nature, which gives life. It is
especially stated that she gave increase to the flocks,[733] and since
she was named after different mountains we may assume that high places
and mountains were the chosen seats of her worship. In Greek and Roman
art the Phrygian goddess is represented as sitting on a chariot drawn by
lions and panthers, with a cymbal in her hand, and wearing on her head
the mural crown as the goddess of the earth which supports cities.

By the side of the Great Mother stands the god Atys, whom Herodotus
calls a son of Manes.[734] He grew up with the shepherds among the goats
of the forest. The goddess loved him, but he fled away into the
mountains, and there, under a fir-tree, into which his spirit passed, he
made himself an eunuch. In search of him Amma roams over the hills in
frantic grief, and carries into her cave the tree into which his spirit
passed. The emasculation and death of Atys, as also his resurrection,
were celebrated by the Phrygians.[735] At these festivals a fir-tree was
felled, crowned with violets, twined with garlands, and carried into the
sanctuary of the goddess. Afterwards Atys was sought in the mountains
with wild music and frenzy, as Amma had sought him. The third day of the
festival was "the day of blood," i.e. of the mutilation and death of
Atys, who was bewailed with despairing grief, amid rending of the hair
and beating of the breast. Then followed a happier scene, the festival
of "the resurrection," and the washing of the stone of the goddess.[736]
We learn further that Atys was also called Papas among the Phrygians. He
is also entitled the goat-herd and neat-herd; the plastic art of Greece
and Rome represents him as a youthful shepherd with the Pan's-pipe, and
by his side is a pine and a ram. According to later accounts he was the
"shepherd of the bright stars."[737] Hence we must assume that in Atys
the Phrygians personified the youthful bloom of nature, the bloom of the
spring, and they mourned the disappearance of this, just as, according
to the Greeks, they sang a piercing wail--the Lityerses--at the time of
corn-cutting. They lamented the death of the spring, and the fall of the
fruit; the youthful god had resigned his own power; the creative vigour
continued only to exist in the tree of Atys, the ever-green fir. In the
spring time it awoke again; this was the day of the resurrection with
its joy and pleasure. This orgiastic worship, and roaming with wild
cries over the heights and in the ravines of the mountains, sometimes in
wailing and lamentation, sometimes in joy, is peculiar to the religion
of the Phrygians.

The central point of the Phrygian kingdom lay westwards of the great
salt plain in the region between Gordium and Ancyra, between Midaëum and
Pessinus in the valley of the Sangarius, on whose banks the Homeric
poems place the Phrygians, who are the possessors of "well-walled
cities."[738] If the majority of the Phrygians remained farmers and
shepherds, they nevertheless arrived at an early date at a monarchy, and
under this they reached a civilisation by no means contemptible, a
national culture, with an architecture and music of their own. On the
religion of the Phrygians the rites of their Semitic neighbours on the
north and south no doubt exercised a strong influence. The combination
of the creative power and the power hostile to procreation into one
deity, and the custom of mutilation, are conceptions and rites unknown
to the Aryan nations. But they are closely connected with the forms and
worship of Astarte-Ashera, just as Atys resembles the Adonis of the
Syrians. On the other hand, as was remarked above, the Phrygians adopted
the Greek alphabet on their monuments, and Greek verses were composed
for the tomb of Midas (p. 528). In return the Greeks adopted the
Phrygian flute, and along with it the form of the elegy and the Phrygian
harmonies. Nor were these all. The wild roaming, the unchecked sorrow
and joy, the tambourines and drums of the Phrygian festivals passed
without doubt in the first instance to the Greek colonies in the
Propontis, and more especially to Cyzicus, and from thence to the mother
country at the celebration of certain festivals of Demeter and Dionysus.
"Take," says Euripides in the _Bacchæ_, "take the drums, the invention
of the Phrygians and the mother Rhea. Long ago the Corybantes (the
attendants of the Great Mother) devised the mighty circle of the
stretched hide and placed in Rhea's hand, with the loud, sweet-sounding
tone of Phrygian flutes, the thunder for the festal song."[739]

Towards the east, the south coast of Asia Minor was inhabited by the
Cilicians and the Solymi. To the former belonged the slopes of Taurus
and the coast to the right bank of the Kalykadnus. Towards the west came
the Solymi, in a wild and broken mountain country. They took their name
from the Solyma mountains (_sallum_ = steps), which they inhabited, and
according to Choerilus of Samos, they spoke the language of the
Phenicians.[740] "The pass," so Xenophon tells us, "which leads to
Cilicia (from the interior of Asia Minor) is very steep, and only broad
enough for a single waggon. On descending from it you come into a
well-watered plain by the sea, which is inclosed from one end to the
other by lofty and precipitous mountains. But the plain itself is large
and beautiful, and filled with trees of every kind, and with vines. It
produces much sesame, wheat, millet, and barley."[741] In addition to
these advantages the slopes of Taurus offered splendid pastures for
horses, and on the coast were excellent harbours. The inhabitants of
this favoured land, known in Assyrian inscriptions as Chillakai, and on
the coins of the district from the Persian times as Chelech,[742]
belonged, like their neighbours on the Orontes and on the Upper
Euphrates, to the Semitic stock. This is proved by the names of their
districts and places of their gods, and by the inscriptions on their
coins. The Semitic stamp of names of places like Amanus (_amana_, firm),
Adana (_eden_, delight), Mallus (_maa'la_, height), Tarsus (_tars_, dry)
is beyond a doubt.[743] Herodotus tells us that the Cilicians wore
woollen clothes, and peculiar helmets of ox-leather, and carried swords
and spears like the Egyptians, and he maintained that they were
descended from Cilix, the son of Agenor, a Phenician. Their princes were
always styled Syennesis.[744] This standing name was, without doubt, the
title given by the princes of Cilicia to themselves: it must have been
_schu'a nasi_, _i.e._ "noble prince."[745] Hellanicus tells us that of
the two kings of the name of Sardanapalus, who ruled over Assyria, one
had built the two cities of Tarsus and Anchiale in Cilicia in one
day.[746] On the other hand Berosus informs us that Sennacherib (705-681
B.C.) had heard in Assyria that an army of Greeks had landed in
Cilicia; against this he marched and defeated it, but with heavy loss.
As a memorial of this victory he caused his image to be set up there,
and afterwards the city of Tarsus was built in such a way that the
Cydnus flowed through the middle of it. The temple at Anchiale (west of
Tarsus, on the sea) was also founded by Sennacherib.[747] When Alexander
of Macedonia reached Cilicia his attendants found that the circuit and
towers of the walls of Anchiale proved that the city was planned on a
large scale. Near the walls they saw the statue of an Assyrian king. His
right hand was raised, and the inscription in Assyrian letters is said
to have called him Sardanapalus, the son of Anakyndaraxes.[748]

No king of the name of Anakyndaraxes or Sardanapalus ever ruled over
Assyria, unless perhaps by the latter is meant Assurbanipal
(Assurbanhabal), the son of Esarhaddon. On the other hand, the
inscriptions of Shalmanesar II. of Asshur (859-828 B.C.) mention the
fact that he had overcome "Pikhirim the chief of the land of Chilakku
(Cilicia)," and Sargon, king of Assyria (722-705 B.C.), tells us that
the Cilicians had not been subject to his father, and that he had
transferred the dominion over Cilicia to Ambris, king of Tubal. Hence
Cilicia must have become subject to Sargon in the earliest years of his
reign. In consequence of the revolt, which Ambris undertook with Urza of
Ararat, and Mita, the king of Moschi, as we saw above (p. 520), Ambris
was taken captive and dethroned in the year 714 B.C. Sennacherib, the
successor of Sargon (705-681 B.C.), informs us that in the very first
years of his reign he had caused rebellious Cilicians to be removed: the
inscriptions of the later years of his reign remark that the cities of
the Cilicians were destroyed and burnt, and the Cilicians in the forests
were reduced. After this the inscriptions of Esarhaddon (681-668 B.C.)
assure us that he reduced the Cilicians; and Assurbanipal recounts that
Sandasarmi of Cilicia, who had not submitted to the kings his fathers,
and fulfilled their commands, sent his daughter with many presents to
Nineveh for the harem of Assurbanipal, and kissed his feet.[749]

The fall of the Assyrian kingdom restored their freedom to the
Cilicians, and they appear to have maintained it till the times of
Cyrus. After that time the princes of Cilicia were merely the viceroys
of the kings of Persia. To these sovereigns Cilicia paid each year 500
Babylonian talents of silver and 360 selected horses. The harbours,
which carried on a lively trade, were able, at the beginning of the
fifth century B.C., to equip and man a hundred ships of war
(triremes).[750]

The coins which have come down to us from the supremacy of the Persians
allow us to form some conclusions about the religious rites of the
Cilician cities. They represent Baal, the sun-god of the Syrians, on the
throne, with grapes and ears of corn in his right hand, and sometimes an
eagle at his side. Others exhibit Heracles attacking a lion with his
club. The inscriptions name the god thus represented Bal Tars, _i.e._
Baal of Tarsus. A coin of Mallus also exhibits Heracles strangling the
lion, i.e. the beneficent sun-god who overcomes the terrible sun-god in
the sign of the lion, the consuming glow of the sun. On other coins we
can trace the war-goddess, on others the birth-goddess of the Syrians,
or her cow; some coins of Celenderis exhibit the goat of this
goddess.[751]

The land of the Cilicians must at one time have stretched northwards
over the Taurus range to the inner table-land as far as the sources of
the Sarus, to the watershed between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea,
or even further. Sargon could not have transferred the sovereignty over
Cilicia to the king of Tubal if his territory was not contiguous to
Cilicia. And if we assume that the land of Tubal reached at that time as
far as the Taurus, we are met by the objection that even Herodotus
represents the Halys as passing through the land of the Cilicians on its
way from Armenia.[752] Hence the land afterwards called Cataonia,
between Taurus and Antitaurus and the northern spur of the latter range,
must, even in the time of Herodotus, have belonged to Cilicia.

On the north-western slope of the Armenian mountains toward the Black
Sea we have already found the Moschi and Tibarenes, whom the Hebrews
counted among the sons of Japhet. The western neighbours of the
Tibarenes on the coasts of the Black Sea were the Chalybians. It is the
land of the Chalybians of which the Homeric poems speak, when they
mention the city of Alybe--"where is the birth of silver."[753] But it
is not only the obtaining of silver that is ascribed by the Greeks to
the Chalybians; they are also the discoverers of the working of iron;
and steel, which the Greeks obtained from this coast, was named after
the Chalybians. Æschylus calls the Chalybians "barbarous workers in
brass, men averse to foreigners."[754] In the scriptures of the Hebrews
Tubal-cain, a name of which the first part seems to denote the
Tibarenes, is the father of the smiths in brass and iron. Hence it is
clear that the mines of ore and iron in the land of the Tibarenes and
Chalybians must have been opened at a very early period. As a fact the
ore lies at a very slight depth in the mountains. Even now large masses
of copper are discovered along the coast to the west of Trebizond;
beside copper, the mines of Gümüsh Khane, two days' journey in the
interior from Trebizond, even now yield lead containing silver, which is
also found in the mines of Baibut and Tokat, further to the south.[755]
Hence these districts could furnish not only iron and steel, but silver
also; elsewhere silver was only to be got in the mines on Mount Ida till
the Phenicians imported this metal in large quantities from Tartessus.

Westward of the Chalybians on the Thermodon, the Iris, and the lower
course of the Halys, dwelt a population which, setting aside any later
admixture, were of Semitic origin. Herodotus calls the inhabitants of
the land which reaches from Armenia on the east to the Halys on the
west, from the coast of the Black Sea southwards as far as Cilicia,
Syrians, and remarks that this was the name of the people in use among
the Greeks.[756] Pindar speaks of "a spear-armed Syrian host" on the
mouth of the Thermodon.[757] The Greek colony of Sinope west of the
mouth of the Halys is said to have been founded in the land of the
Syrians of noble stock.[758] A promontory running into the sea to the
north of Sinope is called Syrias.[759] The Greeks derived the people in
this district from Syrus, a son of Apollo.[760] Scylax of Caryanda names
the coast of the Black Sea, from the Chalybians to Armene, westward of
the promontory of Syrias, Assyria.[761] Strabo states that these
Syrians, who extended from the Taurus northwards as far as the Pontus,
were named Leuco-Syrians, _i.e._ white Syrians, to distinguish them from
the true Syrians, and that the Cataonians (p. 538) spoke the same
language with them.[762] The coins struck at Sinope (Sanab), Side and
Kotyora (Gazir), in the fourth century B.C., have Aramaic legends, and
we can trace on them the name and form of the god Baal.[763] The
Persians called these people Cappadocians (Katapatuka), and extend the
name to Cilicia also. If the Phrygians when marching westwards from
Armenia not only traversed but took possession of the land, the
Phrygians who remained in the country must have retired to the west
before the Semitic tribe, which forced its way from Cilicia and the
Upper Euphrates, or have been absorbed by them.

In the eighth century B.C. the Syrians between the Lower Halys and
Armenia received a peculiar admixture. "On the shore of the Pontus,
where the Scythians now dwell"--such is the account of Herodotus--"it is
said that the territory of the Cimmerians lay, and in Scythia the
Cimmerian Bosporus and Cimmerian walls and harbours remain, and a region
which is called Cimmeria. When the Scythians who once dwelt in the east
were driven out by the Massagetes or the Issedones, they came into the
land of the Cimmerians. The latter took counsel on the river Tyras, and
one part were inclined with the kings to fight against the Scythians,
but the others wished to abandon the land. Thus a strife arose between
the two parties, and those who wished to retire from the land defeated
the king and all who were of the same opinion with him, and buried the
slain on the Tyras, where their grave is still to be seen. Then the
remainder fled before the Scythians along the sea to Asia, and settled
on the peninsula, where Sinope, the city of the Greeks, is now built.
But the Scythians took their land in possession, and, led by their king
Madyas, they pursued the retreating Cimmerians, but missed them, as they
took the upper road, which is far longer, and keeps the Caucasus on the
right."[764]

We shall return to the Scythians again; for the present we may leave
them out of the question. In Homer the Cimmerians, "miserable men, who
are veiled in cloud, darkness, and night, and are never illuminated by
the sun," dwell "at the end of earth and Oceanus, where is the opening
of the entrance into the under-world."[765] As guardians of the
under-world Aristophanes calls them after the dog of Hades,
Cerberians.[766] Following the guidance of the Homeric poems, the
Cimmerians were sought in the west, where the sun sinks, and the
entrance to the under-world was supposed to be; they were placed in the
neighbourhood of the Italic Kyme.[767] When the Milesians, about the
middle of the eighth century, discovered the north shore of the Black
Sea, they found in the extreme north, at the end of the earth, a nation
whom the Greeks called Cimmerians. Thus the entrance into Lake Mæotis
obtained among the Greeks the name of the Bosporus of the Cimmerians, in
contrast to the Bosporus of the Thracians. At a later time the
Cimmerians were identified with the Germanic Cimbri and the Celtic
Kymri.

Hence the decision would seem to be correct that the Cimmerians ought to
be struck out of history as a mythical nation and a mythical name, which
was perhaps intended to correspond to the misty, wintry nature of some
remote lands, did not the poet Callinus of Ephesus, whose date falls
about the year 700 B.C., speak of "the approaching army of the
Cimmerians, who achieved mighty deeds:" did not Herodotus himself tell
us that the expelled Cimmerians "settled on the peninsula at the place
where the Greek city of Sinope now stands"; and also narrate that the
Cimmerians, while king Ardys ruled over the Lydians (654-617 B.C.),
invaded Lydia, and captured Sardis, the metropolis, except the citadel;
and that Alyattes king of Lydia (612-563 B.C.) first expelled the
Cimmerians entirely out of Asia Minor:[768] did not Aristotle tell us
that the Cimmerians had been settled for a hundred years in Antandros,
on the Trojan coast, and Scymnus of Chius, that the Milesian Abron, who
founded Sinope, was said to have been slain by the Cimmerians, that Coes
and Cretines founded the city anew, "after the Cimmerians, when their
array traversed Asia"?[769]

The Cimmerians then were not a legendary fiction: the Cimmerian Bosporus
really owed its name to a people who called themselves, or were known to
the Greeks, by this name, as also the hamlet of Cimmerikum on the
Crimea, and Cimmerium on the peninsula of Kertch. Strabo, the best
authority on the Eastern districts of Asia Minor, of which he was a
native, says: "The wanderings of the Scythian Madys (it is the Madyas of
Herodotus) and of Kobos the Trerian are unknown to most people. The
Cimmerians, who are called Treres,[770] or a tribe of them, dwelt on the
gloomy Bosporus. They came from a far distant region, and are said to
have been driven out by the Scythians. They have often attacked the
right side, _i.e._ the eastern side of the Pontus, and fought against
the Cappadocians, Paphlagonians, and Phrygians;[771] they crossed the
Halys, and forced their way as far as the Ionian cities.[772] Their
first invasion is placed by the chronologers in the time of Midas, who
put an end to his life by drinking bull's blood, _i.e._ as we saw above
(p. 528) in the period from 738 to 693 B.C., or according to others, in
the time of Homer, or shortly before him.[772] But Lygdamis, with a
horde of his own, forced his way to Lydia and Ionia, and conquered
Sardis, though he remained in Cilicia.[773] Callisthenes says that
Sardis was first taken by the Cimmerians, then by the Treres, and
finally by Cyrus. The first capture is also proved by Callinus. At
length the Treres, under Kobos, are said to have been driven out by the
Scythians under Madys."[774]

From this account it is clear that the Cimmerians, or a part of them,
were called Treres, a name also given to a Thracian tribe between the
Skomius and Hebrus, on the Bistonian Lake;[775] that they made at least
two invasions into the west of Asia Minor; that the second of these,
which in Strabo is undertaken under the command of Lygdamis, is the same
as the invasion of the Cimmerians which Herodotus places in the time of
king Ardys of Lydia. In both writers this invasion extends to Sardis and
to some of the Greek cities on the coast, and Plutarch expressly
establishes the identity of the invasion of the Treres under Lygdamis
with that of the Cimmerians in Herodotus, on ancient authorities.[776]
Justin calls the Cimmerians a part of the Scythians, who, owing to their
internal contentions, migrated under the leadership of Ilinus and
Scolopitus, and established themselves on the coast of Cappadocia.[777]

The incursion of the Scythians into Media, with which Herodotus has
combined the migration of the Cimmerians, took place, as we shall show
from Herodotus' own statement, about the year 630 B.C. But if Alyattes
of Lydia was the first to expel the Cimmerians from the west of Asia
Minor after they had been settled for a century in Antandros, these
Cimmerians must have been in Asia at least as early as 663 B.C., since
Alyattes reigned till 563 B.C. Further, if Herodotus only mentions the
destruction of Sardis, which took place about 630 B.C., and is wholly
silent on the first destruction by the Cimmerians, this first capture
must have taken place before the time from which he commences his
accurate account of Lydian history, _i.e._ before the accession of Gyges
in the year 689 B.C., or, according to the data of Herodotus, even
before 719 B.C. This capture of Sardis is the only one which could have
been known to Callinus. Further, the Cimmerians are said to have invaded
Phrygia at the time of that Midas who put himself to death in the year
693 B.C. Hence they must have been in Asia Minor before this year, and
if they overpowered Phrygia, they could easily at the same time have
forced their way as far as the western coast. Moreover, Strabo remarks
that the Milesians built Sinope, when they had become acquainted with
the favourable position of the place and the weakness of the people, but
the people were not weak after the Cimmerians had occupied the mouth of
the Halys. The first foundation of Sinope under Abron must therefore be
placed before the arrival of the Cimmerians in Asia Minor. The ancient
Sinope founded the city of Trapezus in the year 756 B.C.,[778] and
therefore that city must have been founded at least ten years earlier,
and its destruction by the Cimmerians must be placed after the year 756
B.C. Hence the Cimmerians might have reached the mouth of the Halys
about 750 B.C., though they cannot have come along the coast from
Colchis, but over the sea. With this agrees the statement that the
Cimmerians forced their way into Asia Minor in the year 782.[779]

From this investigation it follows that the Cimmerians once possessed
the north shore of the Black Sea on the straits from Kaffa, westward
perhaps as far as the mouth of the Danube. Since the Treres, a Thracian
nation, are always mentioned in connexion with the Cimmerians, and it is
ascertained that Thracian tribes possessed the western coast of Pontus
from the Thracian Bosporus northwards as far as the mouth of the Danube,
and as the Agathyrsi in Transylvania are also called Thracians, there
can hardly be any doubt remaining that the Cimmerians were of Thracian
origin, or at least nearly related to the Thracians. According to the
account of Herodotus the Cimmerians held a consultation on the Tyras
(Dniester), their kings were said to have been killed there, and in
confirmation of the story he appeals to the tumuli which were still to
be seen on the Dniester. The only certain conclusion to be drawn from
this statement is that mounds on the Dniester were shown to Herodotus as
coming down from an older population of those districts. The Cimmerians,
who arrived in Asia Minor (the Tauri, on the peninsula which was named
after them, appear to be a remnant of this nation, who maintained their
old settlements, and the modern name Crimea goes back to the
Cimmerians), must have been a numerous and martial people, if they were
able not only to establish themselves firmly in the East on the Halys,
but also to force their way to the western coast, there to settle down
in several places and maintain themselves in these, and to capture twice
the fortified metropolis of the Lydians, the most warlike nation in Asia
Minor.

According to the genealogy in Genesis, Gomer is the eldest son of
Japhet. This name is without doubt the Semitic term for the population
on the north shore of the Pontus, who were known to the Greeks as
Cimmerians. In the sixth century B.C. the prophet Ezekiel mentions Gomer
beside Togarmah.[780] Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (681-668 B.C.), tells
us that Tiuspa from the distant land of the Cimmerians (Gimirai)
submitted to him with his army. Assurbanipal (668-626 B.C.) relates:
"The Cimmerians were not afraid of my fathers or of me, and would not
take the yoke of my sovereignty. Gugu (Gyges), king of Ludi (Lydia), a
land beyond the sea, a distant region, of which my fathers had not heard
the name, sent a messenger into my presence, in order to implore my
friendship and kiss my feet. From the day on which he accepted my yoke,
he took Cimmerians, desolators of his land, alive in the battle with his
own hand. From the number of the captured leaders he bound two with
strong fetters of iron, and sent them with numerous presents to Nineveh,
the city of my dominion. He constantly sent messengers to ask for my
friendship. He omitted to do so when he disregarded the will of Asshur,
the god, my creator, trusted to his own power, and hardened his heart.
He sent his forces to aid Pisamilki (Psammetichus), king of Egypt, who
had thrown off the yoke of my sovereignty. I heard this, and prayed to
Asshur and Istar thus: May his body be cast out to his enemies, and his
servants be carried away captive. Asshur answered me: His body shall be
cast out to his enemies, and his servants carried away captive. The
Cimmerians, whom he had brought under his feet by the renown of my name,
conquered and laid waste his whole land. His son (Ardys) sat upon his
throne. He sent to me and received the yoke of my supremacy, saying
thus: I am thy subject and servant, and my people will do all thy
will."[781]

Thus the account of the Greeks is completely established. To be
subjugated by Esarhaddon the Cimmerians must have been in Asia Minor in
the first decades of the seventh century B.C., they must also have got
the upper hand here to such a degree that Gyges, king of Lydia, found it
impossible to defend himself against them without the help of the
Assyrians. The first capture of Sardis must have taken place before the
accession of Gyges, on that campaign which the Cimmerians made in the
year 693 B.C. to Phrygia. On the other hand it may be that the
Cimmerians had got possession of the city of Antandrus in the reign of
Gyges. When Gyges had repulsed the Cimmerians he thought that he had no
longer any need of Assyria. For this, according to Assurbanipal, he was
punished by a second invasion of the Cimmerians, who desolated his land;
he lost his life in the battle, of which the Greeks know nothing, and
his son and successor Ardys was again forced to submit to Assyria. That
Ardys had to fight severe battles with the Cimmerians is proved by the
second capture of Sardis, which took place in his reign about the year
630 B.C. While the Cimmerians were thus engaged in the West, the city of
Miletus, or some exiled Milesians, seized the opportunity to re-found
Sinope. Alyattes succeeded in forcing back the Cimmerians and attacking
them with such vigour that they were no longer able to undertake any
invasions to the West. Even Sinope had no more to fear from them,
although their settlements lay in the neighbourhood of this city. At a
subsequent period in the third century B.C. the invading Celts threw the
whole of Asia Minor into a panic, and plundered it, until they were
confined to Galatia; and the invasion of the Cimmerians appears to have
taken a similar course. The Celts, however, maintained themselves within
a limited district; the Cimmerians disappeared so entirely among the
Cappadocians, that Syncellus calls Gomer the progenitor of the
Cappadocians, and the Armenians denote the Cappadocians by the name
Gamir.[782]

In Cappadocia also, rock tombs, sculptures, and fragments of buildings
have been discovered, the authors of which and the date of their
erection we cannot ascertain even approximately. Near Amasia, on the
middle course of the Iris, we find graves hewn in the rocks, of which
those lying nearest the city may have belonged to the first kings of
Pontus. Near Aladja also the façade of a large rock-tomb may be seen.
Near Uejük, on an elevated terrace, are the ruins of a palace, the lower
part of which is formed by great blocks worked and joined in the
Cyclopian style, and the blocks are in part covered with sculptures. In
the middle of the south front is a spacious doorway guarded by two pairs
of lions; one pair is detached, the other is worked out of the stone
posts of the doorway, like the protecting figures in the palaces of
Nineveh.[783] Near Boghaskoi, which is perhaps the site of the ancient
city of Pteria, at the foot of a lofty limestone plateau, overhung by
cones of rock, in the fork of a mountain stream which flows northward to
the Halys, are the remains of a building about 200 feet in length and
140 feet in breadth. A broad staircase leads from the river to a
terrace, on which rises the palace surrounded by a wall. As at Uejük,
the lower part of the structure consists of Cyclopian blocks of fifteen
to twenty feet in length, and some six feet in depth. About thirty
chambers, greater or smaller, surround the court of this structure. The
ground plan is like that of the palaces of Nineveh; in the sculptures a
resemblance has been traced to the reliefs of the buildings of the
Achæmenids. Pteria was afterwards the abode of a Persian commander. On
the rocky plateau over the palace we see the remains of two citadels,
surrounded by lines of fortification, of which the Cyclopian foundations
may still be traced.[784] Two miles and a half to the north-west of the
ruins of the citadels, in the rocks surrounding the plateau, remarkable
sculptures have been discovered. In a deep recess of the rocks the rough
walls, which have been but slightly hewn and smoothed, are covered with
reliefs. There are two rows of figures which meet each other. They
advance from the outer curve of the niche along the side-walls, on the
right and left, towards the back wall. While the figures in these rows
are only from two to three feet high, the shapes on the back wall, which
form the centre of the picture, are of the size of life, and indeed the
main figure is even larger. All the figures are in profile. The main
figure, which moves from left to right, as does the long row of figures
following it on the left side of the niche, is a bearded warrior, who
steps over, or even upon, two bending figures with high and pointed
caps, falling over in front, and in garments which fall in folds from
the girdle. In his right hand he carries a sceptre, the left hand, which
is not very distinct, holds a flower out of which peers a circle, or an
oval ring. His doublet hardly reaches to the knee; the head is covered
with a tall conical cap, and on the feet are pointed shoes. He is
followed by two male figures suitably clothed, who stand on mountain
summits; then between two winged genii are two figures with round caps,
who carry bowls, and behind them a form in a long garment, with a bent
staff in his hand, and a winged circle on his head. Then follow warriors
armed with sabres, or clubs, in the same short doublet and the same
pointed shoes as the three leaders, and between them are two demons, the
only figures presenting a full face, with round, broad faces, who carry
two segments of a circle, one upon the other. They were followed by
warriors and two priests with pointed caps falling over in front. The
end of the row on the left entrance is formed by a series of twelve
warriors, who march on without armour, close together, and with even
step. On the right side of the niche is another row, coming to meet the
row described. Opposite the leader of the warriors, in the middle of the
north wall, is a large female figure, who advances from the right to the
left on a lion or leopard, whose feet rest on four mountain summits. She
wears a long robe falling in folds to her ankles; her hair streams down,
and upon it is a cylindrical head-dress; the right hand carries a staff,
while the left, which holds something similar to the ring already
mentioned, is held out towards the outstretched left hand of the leader
of the warriors. Behind her, on a smaller scale, but also riding on a
lion with the feet resting on mountain summits, is a youthful warrior,
without a beard, in the clothing of the main figure; the head is covered
with a lofty pointed cap, the shoes are also pointed; in the girdle is
the two-edged bill, in the left hand a long battle-axe, and in the right
a staff. He is followed by two female figures above a double eagle, in
the dress of the main female figure; behind them come thirteen more
female figures of a similar kind, with staves or harps in their hands.
The whole picture contains more than sixty figures. In a niche receding
to the back we find, beside a demon of remarkable shape, a young
beardless man with an exceedingly tall conical cap; in his outstretched
right hand he appears to carry the picture of a temple; and with his
left he embraces the neck of a very youthful female form, whose
head-dress and robe fall down in numerous folds. Beside them march
twelve warriors with lower caps than those in the main recess, and
scythe swords in their right hands; the left arm is raised as high as
the shoulder, since they are treading on the left heel, and the top of
the right foot.[785]

If this great rock picture is not intended to represent some act of
religious worship, it might depict the conclusion of a treaty between
two nations. In this case it might belong to the period in which Media,
under Cyaxares, extended her borders to the Halys, and came into fierce
conflict with the Lydians. This war was brought to an end by a treaty of
peace, accompanied by the betrothal of the daughter of Alyattes of
Lydia to the son of Cyaxares. The picture might be explained in
reference to this treaty and betrothal, did not the style and manner
appear closely allied to the figure near Smyrna (p. 151), and a relief
not far from Ancyra.[786]

As to the religious rites of the Cappadocians, we know that they
worshipped the god Men, who is called a moon-god, and a female deity,
Mene, or Ma. On the Lycus, an affluent of the Iris, at Cabeira, stood
the sanctuary of Men in the middle of large precincts; the sanctuary of
Mene was at Comana, on the Iris, and was the oldest, richest, and most
important sanctuary in the land. Ma, or Mene, was a war-goddess whom
Greeks and Romans called Enyo and Bellona; to Strabo she is known as
Artemis, and this name is evidence of her relation to the moon, no less
than of her position as a war-goddess. That relation is confirmed by
further evidence. Comana, says Strabo, is thickly populated; but the
inhabitants are effeminate; the greater part are fanatics or religious
maniacs, and there is also a number of women who serve the goddess with
their bodies, of whom the greater part are dedicated to the temple.
Here, twice in the year, the "Exodus of the Goddess" was celebrated. To
this festival pilgrims, male and female, came from every side, and in
frenzy and ecstasy performed certain sacred customs, which consisted
partly in wounding themselves with swords, and partly in sensual
excesses. In the south of Cappadocia, on the upper Sarus, there was a
second city of Comana, which also possessed a sanctuary of Ma. Here, as
at Comana on the Iris, six thousand servants are said to have attended
upon Ma.[787] We know the tendencies of the Syrian worship, to bring
man, by means of certain services, nearer to the deity to whom the
services are performed, and make him resemble the peculiar nature of the
deity whom he worships. The maidens who served the maiden goddess in her
temples on the Pontus carried weapons like the goddess, and honoured her
by dancing in armour.

Out of these armed maidens in the temples of Ma there grew up among the
Greeks a peculiar and widely-developed legend--the legend of the warlike
tribe of the Amazons. When the Greek colonists landed on the western
coast of Asia Minor, they found, in the land of the Lydians, where they
built Smyrna, Cyme, and Ephesus, seats of the worship of a goddess whom
they compared to their Artemis, and whose attendants were eunuchs and
armed maidens (p. 556). They next perceived that similar seats of
worship were to be found in the East also, on the coasts of the Pontus.
Thus the Homeric poems already placed the "Amazons equal to men" on the
east of the Phrygians, and represented king Priam as meeting them with
his men on the banks of the Sangarius.[788] As natives of Asia Minor the
Amazons must have fought with the Trojans against the Greeks. Arctinus
represented the Amazons as coming to Troy after the death of Hector, and
distressing the Greeks till Achilles slew their queen, the beautiful
"Penthesilea, the daughter of the dread, manslaying Ares." The cyclic
poets knew the abode of the Amazons more accurately than Homer; they
place them at Themiscyra, on the Thermodon;[789] and at this place
Pindar represents them as drawing up their army. Æschylus also places
the Amazons on the Thermodon;[790] according to Pherecydes the war-god
begot the Amazons with Harmonia on the Thermodon.[791] We have seen that
the Greeks gave the name Harmonia to Astarte, the moon-goddess of the
Phenicians. When the Greeks at the time of Arctinus had founded Sinope
and Trapezus in those regions, they believed that they were in the land
of the Amazons; and Sinope was thought to have been previously inhabited
by the Amazons.[792] The places at which the Greeks here founded a new
home were thought to have been named and sanctified long before their
arrival, not only by the voyage of the Argonauts, for Heracles, Theseus,
and Peirithous were said to have set foot there, in order to perform
their mighty deeds against the Amazons. At the command of Eurystheus
Heracles had been compelled to bring the girdle from Hippolyte, the
queen of the Amazons, for Admete. Theseus and Peirithous had carried off
Antiope. Among the Phenicians, as we have seen, Baal-Melkarth looses the
girdle of the moon-goddess; the Greeks transferred the legend of
Melicertes to their Heracles. Even as early as the thirteenth or twelfth
century B.C. the ships of the Phenicians had probably brought the
worship of the warlike moon-goddess to the coast of Attica. At any rate,
at a later time, tombs of the Amazons, _i.e._ abandoned seats of the
worship of the Artemis of Syria and Asia Minor, were shown there. After
the Attic territory was united under the rule of a military monarchy, of
which, among the Ionians, Theseus was the embodiment, the Phenicians
were driven back from the coasts of the Greeks: Theseus was said to
have conquered the Minotaur and the Amazons. In order to establish the
existence of Amazons in Attica, Theseus was said to have carried off
Antiope. To avenge this wrong, the Amazons marched from their distant
home on the Thermodon to Attica; and the Athenians considered it one of
their greatest services towards their common fatherland that they had
conquered the Amazons, "an enemy who threatened all Hellas."[793]

Out of these elements the Greeks framed a circumstantial history of the
Amazons. Even among the historians, their home is the land of the
Thermodon. Here the Amazons dwelt, according to Herodotus, Diodorus, and
Strabo, and here, as Diodorus tells us, they offered splendid sacrifices
to Ares and Artemis Tauropolus. Their first queen is said to have been
the daughter of Ares, and she built the great city of Themiscyra; the
second queen extended the dominion of the Amazons as far as Syria; and
finally queen Myrina reduced the whole of Syria, and received the
voluntary submission of the Cilicians.[794] It is obvious that the
Amazons founded all the cities where the worship of the maiden
war-goddess flourished or had ever existed. Roused by the crime of
Theseus, they marched to the west, founded the sanctuary of Ephesus,
where "they set up the image of the goddess under the trunk of an elm,
and, armed with shields, danced the war-dance, so that their quivers
sounded."[795] Then they marched to the north, and founded Smyrna,
Myrina, and Cyme.[796] Analogous rites proved that they were also in
Lesbos and Samothrace. Through Thrace and Thessaly, and finally across
Euboea, they are said to have marched to Attica; tombs of the Amazons
were shown at Scotussa and Cynoscephalæ, in Thessaly, and at Chalcis, in
Euboea.[797] After returning home, the Amazons next marched to the aid
of the Trojans, and were conquered by Achilles. When the Greeks had
founded Cyrene on the coast of Attica, and found, among the Libyan
tribes of the surrounding district, the worship of a female
war-goddess--when they found the Libyan women wearing corslets of
goatskins, they came to the conclusion that the Amazons once dwelt on
the Tritonian lake in Libya.[798]

A nation of heroines was certainly never found by the Greeks on the
Thermodon. On the other hand, they received accounts of the warlike
queens of the Saces and Massagetæ, of Zarinæa, Sparethra, and Tomyris,
who fought against the Medes and Persians; and on the coasts of the
Black Sea, in the colonies of the Milesians, they heard of the riding,
the archery, and hunting of the women of the Sauromatæ. Hence the Greeks
resolved to make the Amazons the ancestors of the Sarmatians. They were
represented as taking ship from the Thermodon across the Black Sea to
the coast of the Mæotis, because here, in the Crimea, on the "promontory
of the maiden," a cruel maiden goddess, who was also called Artemis
Tauropolus by the Greeks, was worshipped. Herodotus, and after him
Ephorus, tells us that the Amazons fled over the Pontus from the
Thermodon, and landed on the shore of the Mæotis. Here they took the
young men among the Scythians, who, according to Herodotus, were settled
between the mouths of the Danube and the Don, as their husbands, and
with them marched eastwards over the Tanais (Don), beyond which river
and north of the Caucasus lay, according to Herodotus, the dwellings of
the Sauromatæ, whom later writers call the Sarmatians. Hence the
Sarmatian women still preserved the customs of the Amazons; they carried
bows and javelins, and wore the same clothing as the men, sat on
horseback, and rode with or without their husbands to the chase or to
battle, and no maiden married till she had slain an enemy; "so that some
never married at all, because they were unable to satisfy this rule."
The language of the Sauromatæ was the same as the language of the
Scythians, but they spoke it badly, because the Amazons had never
perfectly learned it. These statements, and especially the assertion
that the Sarmatian women fought as long as they were maidens, were
repeated by Greek writers--in other respects very trustworthy--in the
fifth and fourth century B.C. Others also maintained that the women were
rulers among the Sarmatians.[799] Poetry and plastic art had stamped
the legend of the Amazons so firmly on the Greeks that they could not
break loose from it. Several of the historians of Alexander of Macedon
tell us that the queen Thalestris, with 300 Amazons, sought out
Alexander from a great distance, and made a proposal of marriage to him,
on his return from Hyrcania,[800] a story which has perhaps arisen out
of the fact that the satrap Atropates of Media sent 100 mounted women to
Alexander.[801] When at a later time Pompey fought in the Caucasus, and
women were found among the wounded, it was thought that the real Amazons
were at last found;[802] and the story was now told that the Amazons
dwelt northward of the Gelen (in Ghilan), on the southern foot of the
Caucasus. In order to solve the difficulty of their propagation of the
race, the story was invented that for two months in the spring they met
the Gargareans--a neighbouring tribe--on the mountains by night, and
associated with them, as accident might determine. The boys were then
sent to the Gargareans, who brought them up in common; the daughters
were retained by the Amazons.[803] In order to explain the name Amazon,
which in Greek can mean "without a breast," the story was invented that
they burnt off the right breast of the maidens, so that they might use
the right arm better, and draw the bow--a story which Hippocrates had
already told about the daughters of the Sarmatians.[804] On the
monuments of plastic art the Amazons have both breasts; the older
period represents them with a broad girdle, an ample robe, and a
Phrygian cap, a crescent shield (the symbol of the moon-goddess), a bow,
and a battle-axe. In later sculptures the Amazons, when they had been
connected with the Scythians and the Sarmatians, were generally
represented on horseback, in a Doric tunic, with naked arms and thighs,
a helmet on the head, and a spear in the hand.

On the western slopes of the table-land of Asia Minor, in the river
valleys of the Hermus and Mæander, the Lydians were settled. Their land
reached from the sources of the Hermus in Mount Dindymon to the Ægean
sea, from Messogis and Cadmus in the south to the Temnus range in the
north. The valley of the Hermus was exuberantly fertile, and still more
luxuriant was the vegetation in the district round the Gygæan lake. The
mountain pastures supported herds of powerful horses and numerous flocks
of sheep. The Pactolus brought sands of gold down from Tmolus; in the
rocks of this range and its western continuation, Sipylus, rich veins of
gold are said to have been found.[805]

But little has been preserved of the legendary accounts of the Lydians
about their rulers in the earliest times. About the middle of the fifth
century B.C. the Lydian Xanthus, the son of Candaules, wrote the history
of his people in four books, in the Greek language. Of this some
fragments have come down to us, which can here and there be supplemented
by the statements of Herodotus. From both we learn that the Lydians
traced back the origin of their royal house to the gods. Atys, the son
of the god Manes, was the first sovereign of the Lydians; after him
came his son Lydus, who gave the name to the people. From the brother of
Lydus, whom Xanthus calls Torrhebus, and Herodotus Tyrsenus, the tribe
of the Torrhebians or Tyrsenians was derived. The territory of the
Torrhebi lay on the upper Cayster. From Asius, the son of Cotys, the son
of Atys, sprang the tribe of the Asionæans, who inhabited the Asian
meadow.[806] From Atys, their progenitor, the first king, his
successors, the first house of Lydian kings, were called Atyads. Among
the successors of Lydus the most pious and just was Alkimus. During his
reign there was peace and quiet in Lydia; every man lived securely and
without fear, and all things prospered. After him reigned king Akiamus,
who sent Ascalus with an army to Syria. There Ascalus founded the city
of Ascalon. After this, as Herodotus narrates, a lion was born to king
Meles from his concubine, and this lion, in obedience to an oracle, he
caused to be carried round the walls of Sardis, his metropolis, in order
that they might be impregnable.[807] According to Xanthus, Meles, who
was a tyrannous and cruel king, was overthrown by Moxus, a very just and
brave man, after he had vowed to the gods that, in gratitude for their
deliverance, the Lydians should henceforth offer to them a tenth of all
their animals. Then Moxus marched to Syria, and there took Atargatis
captive, with her son Ichthys (fish). As a punishment for her rebellion
she was thrown into the lake of Ascalon, and eaten by the fish. Then
king Cambletes reigned, who sacrificed his wife, and ate her, and then
slew himself with his sword before all the people. After him Jardanus,
who had been an enemy of Cambletes, ruled over Lydia.[808] Jardanus was
followed by his daughter Omphale.[809] To avenge the insult which had
been paid to her before she ascended the throne of Lydia, she compelled
the maidens of the land to give themselves up to the slaves at an
appointed place, and slew the strangers whom she entertained, when she
had lain with them.[810] After Omphale, Tylon reigned, who died from the
bite of a snake, but was again restored to life by a marvellous
herb.[811] But with the slave-girl of Jardanus, according to Herodotus,
or, according to others, with Omphale, Heracles begot Alcæus; the son of
Alcæus was Belus; the son of Belus was Ninus, and the son of Ninus was
Agron. With the accession of Agron the dominion of the Atyads came to an
end, and that of the Heracleids commenced, who then continued to rule
over Lydia for 505 years.[812]

Manes and Atys are already known to us as deities of the Phrygians; they
must therefore have been worshipped by the Lydians also. Lydus, the
second king of the land, is taken from the name of the nation. The
prosperous, peaceful reign of the good king Alkimus is no doubt founded
on some conception of an early happy age. The story of the lion of Meles
obviously goes back to the relations in which the lion was placed, in
the religious rites of the Syrians, to the sun-god, who was also
worshipped with zeal by the Lydians. We learn from a Lydian that the
name Sardis was given to the city in honour of the sun-god.[813] The
coins of Sardis which have been preserved regularly present the image of
a lion and a bull.[814] The vow of Moxus is intended to explain the
blood-tithe, which we have already found in use among the tribes of
Syria. Still more definite are the references to Syrian rites in the
supposed marches of Moxus and Ascalus to Syria, and the prominent
position of Atargatis[815] and the temple of Ascalon, and the children
of Atargatis, the fish. We know Atargatis, the Astarte of the Assyrians,
as transformed into Hera, and the temple at Ascalon, the city of the
Philistines, as the oldest and most famous sanctuary of the Syrian
goddess of fertility. The name of the king Jardanus does not differ from
"jarden" (river), and if Omphale is said to have forced the maidens of
the land to prostitute themselves at a fixed place, we have already
found this prostitution in the worship of the Syrian goddess of birth
and the Babylonian Mylitta. The new dynasty which ascends the throne of
Lydia after the Atyads with Agron is again derived from a god, according
to the accounts of the Greeks, from Heracles and Omphale. The Greeks
narrated that Omphale carried the lion's skin and club of Heracles, and
that she clothed the hero in a transparent female robe of scarlet, and
caused him to card wool and spin as her slave.[816] Lydian coins exhibit
a female form with the lion's skin and the bow.[817] It was shown above
that the Greeks connected Melkarth (Melicertes) with their Heracles, and
that according to the mythus of the Syrians, the sun-god finds and
overpowers the moon-goddess; that after the holy marriage, the god on
his part succumbs to the goddess, and changes his nature with her; he
assumes the female nature, she the male; she carries the weapons, while
he performs woman's work. We saw that the Syrians symbolised the
pre-eminent nature, the unity of the deity, in this amalgamation of the
sexes--this female manhood and male womanhood. Johannes Lydus tells us
that the Lydians worshipped the sun-god under the name Sandon, and adds,
that because Sandon had lived as a woman, the men at the mysteries of
the god clothed themselves in women's clothes, and put on transparent
crimson garments, coloured with vermilion.[818] Thus the Greeks put
their hero in the place of the Lydian sun-god, who overwhelms the lion,
and changes his nature with the goddess; and if they farther tell us
that Omphale gave her love to strangers, but also slew all who lay with
her, this also is a trait which had already met us in the Syrian
Astarte, in the nature of Ashera-Astarte, which at one time grants the
enjoyment of love, and at another brings destruction.

The result of these considerations proves that the traits of the Lydian
legends, which have been preserved, present us with very little beyond
mere mythical elements. The connection of the Lydian worship with the
worship of the Syrians comes plainly to the surface, and this connection
is confirmed by all that we know from other sources of the rites of the
Lydians. The name of their sun-god Sandon[819] recurs on Assyrian
monuments, where it appears as Sandan.[820] In the Semitic languages the
word means "helper," and is used as an attribute of the god Adar, with
whom we are already acquainted as the god of the planet Saturn.[821] It
is obvious that the title "helper" could be given not to Adar only, but
to any other god, from whom special favour and assistance might be
expected. The Lydians gave the title to the good sun-god, who vanquishes
the glowing heat--the terrible sun-god--who looses the girdle of the
moon-goddess, and changes his nature with her. When the Greek colonists
landed on the coast of Lydia, they at first recognised their own Apollo,
i.e. their god of light, in the Lydian god. They allowed the sanctuary
of the Lydian god at Miletus to remain in the hands of a family of
native priests, the Branchidæ. As god of the country and protector of
the coast, the Homeric poems give to Apollo the foremost place among the
deities who defend Troy. The Lydians also on their side recognised the
connection between their sun-god and the Apollo of the Greeks; Gyges and
Croesus send rich presents to Delphi. But when the Greeks of the coast
became more accurately acquainted with the nature and the myths of the
Lydian sun-god, that side which chiefly corresponded to their Heracles,
and the image of Heracles developed under the influence of the
Phenician Melkarth, came into prominence. The nature of the female
goddess also, whom the Lydians chiefly worshipped, is beyond doubt.
Herodotus tells us that all the daughters of the Lydians sold
themselves, and in this way collected their dowries; others narrate that
they received slaves or foreigners in the groves and porticoes of the
temples.[822] As we have seen, tradition connects this prostitution with
the rule of Omphale, and Johannes Lydus assures us that the goddess
Blatta worshipped in Lydia was the same as the Mylitta of the
Babylonians. Hence the worship of Bilit, the Ashera of the Syrians,
prevailed also among the Lydians, a fact which the campaigns (already
mentioned) of Ascalus and Moxus to the shrine of Derceto at Ascalon also
prove. That this goddess of the Lydians was not without her destructive
side--the power and nature of Astarte--we could already infer from the
bloody acts of Omphale (p. 562). At the mouths of the Cayster and the
Hermus the Greeks found the shrines of a goddess, whose priests were
eunuchs, and who was at the same time honoured with dances in armour by
maidens, as the moon and war-goddess of the Cappadocians.[823] This
goddess of the coasts of Lydia was called by the Greeks Artemis, and
this name distinguishes her as at once a maiden goddess and the goddess
of the moon and of war. And if at the same time the image of Artemis of
Ephesus was represented with large breasts, the obvious conclusion is
that in the goddess of Lydia, as in the goddesses of Babylonia and
Syria, the two opposites, of continence and sensual enjoyment, of
fertility and of destruction, were united.

The forms of religious worship also would appear to have been in all
essentials the same among the Lydians and the Syrians. Mutilation (which
we know was practised very widely among the Lydians),[824] and the
prostitution of girls, were common to both countries. We found above
that the Arabs and Syrians believed their gods to be present in stones,
and prayed to them in that shape. Not far from Magnesia on Sipylus, a
stone, some twenty feet in height, juts out of a wall of marble, and
this in ancient times must have been regarded with veneration as the
idol of a native goddess. Even in the Homeric poems we find mention of
this stone, and the legend connected with it by the Greek colonists. "I
have seen the stone of Niobe on Sipylus," said Pausanias. "At a near
view it is a fragment of stone, which does not look like a woman or a
person weeping; but from a distance you might believe that you saw a
weeping and mourning woman."[825]

The essential result of the examination of Lydian legend and Lydian
worship is the obvious and very close relationship between the Lydian
and Syrian deities and rites. Moreover, the mountain range which bounds
the valley of the Mæander to the south, bears the Semitic name of
Cadmus, _i.e._ "the Eastern;" and at the foot of the range lies the city
of Ninoë (Nineveh, _i.e._ "to dwell.")[826] Again, from one side the
languages of the Phrygians and Lydians are said to be distinctly
different; on the other hand, most of the Lydian words which have been
preserved to us by the Greeks--it is true they are not numerous--can be
traced back to Semitic roots;[827] and the national genealogy of the
Hebrews enumerates Lud among the sons of Shem, together with Elam,
Asshur, Arphaxad, and Aram. Yet, so far as the Lydian language allows us
to form an opinion, elements of a different character are not entirely
wanting. The gods Manes and Atys, from whom the first royal house was
derived, and after whom it was named, the goddess Cybele, whose temple
stood at Sardis,[828] do not belong to the circle of Semitic deities.
Manes, as well as Atys, we found in Phrygia. Hence, looking back at the
connection between the Armenians, Phrygians, and Thracians, already
brought into prominence we may suppose that the original population of
the river valley of the Hermus was Phrygian, and that Semitic invaders
from the east subjugated these Phrygians and absorbed them; but not
without adopting on their part some elements of the Phrygian language
and worship.

That a monarchy was in existence among the Lydians before the first
Heracleid ascended the throne cannot be doubted. In the time of the
Heracleids we find mention made of the descendants of Tylon (p. 562), a
king who is said to have belonged to the family of the Atyads. The
foundation and fortification of Sardis also seem to belong to the period
before the Heracleids, the period of the Atyads. Herodotus tells us that
the second dynasty, the supposed descendants of Sandon-Heracles, gave
twenty-two sovereigns to the Lydians, who ruled over Lydia for 505
years.[829] However astonishing the pedigree which Herodotus gives to
these Heracleids (the son of Heracles, Alcæus, begets Belus, Belus
begets Ninus, and Ninus Agron),[830] we may regard his statement of the
period for which this dynasty lasted, of which several later members are
established, as historical. And since, after the Heracleids, the family
of Gyges ruled for 140 years down to the time when Cyrus took Sardis,
and since the taking of Sardis fell in the year 549 B.C., the Heracleids
must have ascended the throne of Lydia 645 years previously, _i.e._ in
the year 1194 B.C.[831] What degree of civilisation had been reached by
the Lydians about the year 1000 B.C. we can only conclude from the fact
that the Greek settlers on their coasts found money already coined by
the Lydians, and therefore ascribe to them the invention of the art of
coining.[832] The art of dying wool also was, in the opinion of the
Greeks, an invention of the Lydians; and games at ball as well as at
dice were thought to have been learnt from the Lydians by the
Greeks.[833] That the Greeks made use of the Lydian flute, and
subsequently of the Lydian cithara (both the cithara with three strings
and that with twenty strings), and the Lydian harmonies to enrich their
own music, is an established fact.[834] The Homeric poems describe the
Lydians (Mæonians) as an "armed equestrian people," and mention their
trade and wealth.[835]

North of the Lydians, in the river valleys of the Caïcus Macestus and
Rhyndacus, were settled the Mysians. According to Strabo, they spoke a
language of mixed Phrygian and Lydian elements.[836] It was apparently
the Mysian legend which told of king Tantalus, who possessed the
greatest treasures, who slew his son and offered him for a banquet,
_i.e._ for a sacrifice to the gods. His grave was shown on Sipylus.[837]
Before the Greek colonists took the coasts from them, the Mysians may
have risen to the first elements of civilisation; but when they were
debarred from the sea, they remained within the limits of their
mountains, pursuing an agricultural and pastoral life. About the year
500 B.C. their armour was still a small round shield and javelins, the
points of which were hardened in the fire.[838] In spite of these
miserable weapons they gave a good deal of trouble to the satraps of the
Persian king, and even at a later time desolated the fruitful plains on
the coasts by marauding inroads. Of their worship we only know that the
Greeks found the rites of a god of light on the coasts at Thymbra,
Chryse, and Cilla, who was invoked under the title Smintheus, a word
which is said to mean the expeller or destroyer of field-mice;[839] and
that a goddess of procreation and fertility was worshipped on Ida.[840]
In the Homeric poems it is Aphrodite, by the side of Apollo, who
protects Ilium, and favours Capys and the sons of Priam in the dells of
Ida.

The coast of Asia Minor, to the south of the Lydians, was in the
possession of the Carians. Herodotus tells us that, according to the
legends of the Cretans, the Carians were, in the most ancient times,
called Leleges, and inhabited the islands of the Ægean at the time when
Minos reigned in Crete. They were compelled to man the fleet of Minos. A
long time afterwards they were driven out of the islands by the Ionians
and Dorians, and migrated to Asia Minor. But the Carians themselves
maintained that they had always lived in the land which they
possessed.[841] We cannot hesitate to give the preference to the
assertion of the Carians. From the numerous harbours of their coast they
could easily cross to the neighbouring islands, and thus they could
populate Rhodes Samos and Chios.[842] Advancing from one to another in
the numerous islands of this sea, they reached the Cyclades and settled
there. The most ancient population of Crete, called by the Greeks
Eteocretes, may very likely have consisted of Carians only, as is proved
by the position which Greek legend gives to the Carians in reference to
Minos, as well as by other evidence. This occupation of the islands of
the Ægean Sea by the Carians must be placed about the year 1500 B.C. For
when the Phenicians colonised these islands in the thirteenth century,
they were occupied by Carians. The Carian population became dependent on
the Phenicians. Subsequently, about the year 1000 B.C., the Hellenes
landed on the islands of the Ægean, and drove out the Carians. The
Carians lost even Samos and Chios; they were again confined to their old
home, and they could not even maintain themselves in that, for the best
harbours of their coasts passed into the hands of the Greeks. Yet the
Carians continued to be seamen and pirates. They lay in wait, as before,
for the merchants, and overran the rich coast land. Even in the seventh
century we meet with Carian pirates and mercenaries, and these not only
on the mouths and banks of the Nile; and the Chronographers mention,
apparently, a hegemony of the Carians on the sea, which is placed in the
interval from the year 731 to the year 670 B.C.[843]

The Carians had no monarchy embracing the whole of their territory. But
here also, so far as we can see, princes stood at the head of the
various cities. A kind of confederation united the several places. About
the year 500 we hear of assemblies of Carians on the banks of the
Marsyas near the white pillars, and afterwards we find common sacrifices
of the Carian cities, and days of meeting in the temple of Zeus
Chrysaor, which was situated in the neighbourhood of Mylasa (now Milas)
at Lagina (now Leïna).[844] Among the Carians the Greek colonists found
a style of armour superior to their own, and they adopted it. The
"Catalogue of ships," in Homer, represents the leader of the Carians as
going into battle decked with gold.[845] In Alcæus "the Carian helmet
laments," and Anacreon speaks "of putting the hand upon the well-fitted
Carian haft." Herodotus tells us that the Greeks learned from the
Carians to wear plumes upon their helmets, to paint devices upon their
shields, and to furnish them with fixed handles,--in Homer the shields
are carried over the shoulder by straps. Greaves also are said to have
been invented by the Carians.[846]

We are unable to tell with certainty the origin or the national
characteristics of the Carians, though Herodotus maintains that the
Lydians, Mysians, and Carians spoke the same language. Of the religious
worship of the Carians he tells us that they were the only nation who
worshipped Zeus as a warrior. Mylasa was the centre of their worship. On
the heights which tower over the plain of Mylasa, in a forest of
plane-trees, near Labranda, lay the temple of "Zeus Stratius." The image
of the god is said to have carried the double axe. Carian coins of the
fourth century B.C. display the image of a god with a double axe.[847]
The same axe is also found on the remains of Carian altars. The Greeks
even maintain that the god was named after this axe, that his national
name was Labrandeus, and that in Lydian and Carian _labrys_ meant a
battle-axe. Plutarch says:--Arselis, the Carian of Mylasa, marched to
the aid of Candaules, king of Lydia (he ruled about the year 700 B.C.),
and afterwards he left the sacred axe of the kings of Lydia to the god
of Labranda.[848] This giving up of the battle-axe to the god of the
battle-axe allows us to suppose that the god of Mylasa is meant by the
Carian of Mylasa; and that Arselis may have been the name or attribute
of this god--a supposition which is changed into a certainty by the fact
that in Semitic languages, Chars-el means "axe of El," "axe of
God."[849] Beside this warrior Zeus, a warlike Aphrodite was also
worshipped at Mylasa,[850] and if Strabo calls the goddess of Leïna
Hecate, the reason of the name may be the death-bringing power of the
goddess Astarte-Ashera. The sacred fish who were to be found in a pool
at Mylasa, with gold rings round the neck, would then be evidence of the
bountiful, increase-giving side of the nature of this goddess.[851]

East of the Carians, on the south coast, in the valley of the Xanthus,
were the settlements of the Lycians. The range of Taurus, which here
rises to a height of 10,000 feet, sinks down in fields of snow and
Alpine pastures to the course of the Xanthus. The sides of this valley,
Mounts Kragus and Anti-Kragus, are beautifully wooded, and traversed by
sounding rills. The view extends from the upper course of the river over
the luxuriant vegetation of the plain down to the sea.

Herodotus tells us that this district was once known as Milyas, and that
the Lycians, who were originally called Termilians, immigrated from
Crete. Sarpedon and Minos contended for the throne, and as Minos got the
upper hand, Sarpedon went with the Termilians to Asia, and took
possession of Milyas. Afterwards Lycus, the son of the Attic king
Pandion, when driven out by his brother Aegeus, came to Sarpedon, and
from him the Termilians got the name of Lycians. Their laws were Cretan
and Carian. They wore hats adorned with feathers, goat skins round their
shoulders, sickle-shaped swords and daggers, coats of mail, greaves,
bows, and arrows of reeds. They were named after the mother, and not
after the father, and spoke of the mothers of their mothers as their
ancestors. The son of a free woman and a slave was free and passed for a
well-born man; but if a free man, even the first among them, begot
children with a foreign woman or a concubine, these were outlaws.[852]
Heraclides of Pontus extends these statements so far as to assert that
the Lycians from ancient times had been under the dominion of their
wives; Nicolaus, of Damascus tells us that the daughters of the Lycians,
and not the sons, took the inheritance.[853]

In the Homeric poems, Proetus, king of Argos, sends Bellerophontes of
Ephyra (Corinth) to the king of the Lycians, to be put to death. The
king bade him slay the Chimæra, a monster which was a lion in front, a
goat in the middle part, and a dragon behind, and when he succeeded in
this he sent him to fight against the Solymi and the Amazons. But
afterwards he gave him half his kingdom and his daughter, who bore him
Hippolochus and Laodameia. The son of Hippolochus was Glaucus, and the
son of Laodameia was Sarpedon, the chieftains who led the Lycians to the
aid of the Trojans.

Beside the supposed immigration of the Lycians from Crete and the poetry
of Homer we know nothing of the history of the Lycians beyond the fact
that they did not submit to the army of Cyrus without a most obstinate
resistance. And even under the supremacy of the Persians the Lycians
managed their internal affairs independently. They formed a federation
which was in existence at Strabo's time, and then included twenty-three
places. Each city was represented at the assembly; the six larger cities
had three votes each, the next largest had two, and the smaller cities
had one.[854]

The name Milyas, which, according to Herodotus, was borne by the valley
of the Xanthus, clung even in later times to the spur under the ridge of
Mount Taurus, which runs out eastward towards Mount Solyma. Hence the
Lycians could easily be represented as in conflict with the Solymi. The
name Chimæra is given to a high mountain valley on Mount Kragus.[855] If
the Greeks call the inhabitants of the valley of the Xanthus Lycians,
the name has not arisen among them from the supposed Lycus, the brother
of Ægeus, but rather from the Grecian god of light, Apollo Lyceus.
According to the mythus of the Greeks, Apollo Bellerophontes (who was
worshipped at Corinth), dashes down from his cloud-horse and with his
crown of rays breaks through the thick clouds which obscure the sun; he
overcomes Bellerus, the spirit of darkness. In the mind of the Greeks,
Lycia was free from the clouds of winter; and, as a fact, the climate of
the valley of the Xanthus is excellent. Into this bright land,
therefore, the god was thought to have marched when he had become a
hero; here he overcame the Chimæra, the creature of mist and cloud. The
Greeks went still further in this conception. The east, the land of
sunrise, was in itself the land of light, of the god of light, Lyceus.
The god of light was thought to pass the winter in the brighter east, in
the home of the sun. When the Greek colonists had settled on the western
coasts of Asia Minor, they regarded the valley of the Xanthus as the
eastern land of light, they gave it this name, and supposed that Apollo
passed the winter in Lycia, and gave oracles during the six winter
months at Patara in Lycia.[856] In spite of the eastern situation and
the climate of Lycia, this idea would hardly have taken root had not the
Lycians at Patara, and probably at other places in Lycia, worshipped a
god in whom the Greeks could recognise their own god of light. The
Homeric poems place the Lycians in the closest connection with the
Teucrians. There is a Xanthus in Lycia and in the Troad, and the name
Tros seems to be identical with the name of the Lycian city of Tlos,
which lies high up in the valley of the Xanthus under Taurus. In any
case, from this close combination of the Teucrians and Lycians in Homer,
we may conclude that with the Greeks of the coast the Lycians passed for
a tribe who had already been for a long time in possession of their
settlements. None but native Asiatic tribes could be represented as
fighting beside the native Teucrians as their closest confederates.

The Lycians developed a peculiar civilisation and a peculiar art, of
which numerous monuments, and many of them accompanied by inscriptions,
have come down to us. The alphabet in these inscriptions closely
resembles the Greek. With the aid of some inscriptions written in the
Greek and Lycian languages, scholars have succeeded in fixing the value
of the Lycian letters--of which there are ten for vowels and diphthongs,
and twenty for consonants.[857] By this means we have become acquainted
with the name by which the Lycians called themselves. They were not
merely called Termilians, as Herodotus supposed, in the most ancient
times, but even in their own inscriptions they call themselves Tramele.
The city which the Greeks calls Xanthus is in the language of the
Tramele, Arna; the city of Patara is Pttarazu; Pegasa is Begssere.[858]
In fixing the character of the Lycian language, it was at first supposed
that the Lycians might have been a branch of the Phrygians, who had
forced their way over the Taurus to the south coast--an assumption
which seems to be supported by the fact that the Lycian monuments
resemble the Phrygian in plan and style; and that the Lycians, like the
Phrygians, loved to excavate walls of rock and that in Lycia, as in
Phrygia, the influence of the Greeks was felt at an early time. But the
Lycian idiom, so far as the remains of it have been examined at present,
was distinctly different from the Phrygian language. While some of our
scholars find in the Lycian language words and inflexions allied to the
Albanian, _i.e._ to the remains of the language of the ancient
Illyrians, others are more inclined to place the Lycian in close
connection with the Iranian languages.[859] In either case the Lycians,
like the Armenians and Phrygians, belong to the Indo-Germanic stock, and
not only the Armenians and Phrygians, but along with them the
forefathers of the Lycians came into Asia Minor from the north-east.

The Lycians were settled in a region of strong natural boundaries, and
of a very defined and picturesque form. The position of their land,
protected as it was by strong natural boundaries, secured for them a
more undisturbed development than was possible to the other tribes of
Asia Minor. Their cities and towers, Xanthus, Phellus, Myra, Telmissus,
Patara, Pinara, and Tlos were surrounded by strong walls of Cyclopian
architecture, and the splendid remains are evidence of great skill in
masonry. The noble ruins of Xanthus, not far from the mouth of the river
of the same name, still proclaim, even at a distance, the ancient
metropolis of the Lycians. How far back the monuments of Lycia extend
cannot be determined as yet. The oldest of which the date can be fixed
go back to the reign of Darius II., the Itariayush of Lycian
inscriptions. The reliefs exhibit the Chimæra, as described in Homer;
and they repeatedly exhibit a lion slaying a bull.[860] The Lycians
themselves are represented in long garments, just as in works of Greek
art; and even to this day the peasants on the Xanthus are to be seen in
the caftan.[861] Pictures of battles, of agricultural and pastoral
occupations are frequent on the monuments; but so far as the
inscriptions have been deciphered at present, they afford no single
instance in support of the statement of Herodotus that the Lycians were
not named after the father, but after the mother.[862] The most
important remains are the tombs, which are evidence of the great
industry and care which the Lycians devoted to the repose and memory of
the dead. A considerable number of these tombs lie within the walls of
the city, and are surrounded by the ruins of other buildings. Hence the
dwellings of the dead and of the living were not separated among the
Lycians. Besides sarcophagi, made of blocks brought for the purpose, we
also find detached rocks, which are changed into great sarcophagi, rocky
peaks transformed into sepulchres, and extensive walls of rock, in which
grave-chambers have been cut. The face of the rocky wall, thus hollowed
out for tombs, is provided with façades which rise up in rich variety to
the number of many thousands, over and alongside of each other,
sometimes advancing, sometimes receding, according to the nature of the
rock. The style of these tombs, which is for the most part very
delicate and slender, is an imitation of a kind of wooden structure,
which must have been common in Lycia in ancient times, and the simplest
forms of which are still in use among the peasants of the region which
corresponds to Lycia;[863] sometimes the structure is simpler, at others
more complicated, and the effect is strengthened by delicate and
luxuriant ornamentation. The faces of the rock-tombs sometimes end with
a flat framework of beams, at others with a gable in low relief. The
detached sepulchres exhibit the same imitation of a wooden building.
Many of these sepulchres are obviously intended for three corpses; in
the single chamber included in them are generally found two stone
benches in the sides and at the back a receptacle for a corpse in a
recess.[864] The detached sarcophagi are the most numerous. On a
sub-structure, or immediately on the ground, stands a long stone coffin,
closed by a high massive cover, the section of which exhibits a Gothic
pointed arch. On these sarcophagi also the ornamentation is almost
always rich, and carried out with neatness even to the smallest detail.
Beside the sarcophagi we also find pillars and obelisks among the ruins.
The tympana, friezes, and surfaces of all these monuments are covered
with reliefs, which represent with much truth and liveliness the life of
animals as well as the life of men. Evident remains of colouring on all
the monuments show us that a layer of lively and even startling colours
was laid upon these buildings. The reliefs also were painted, and some
are treated almost as pictures. The inscriptions upon the tombs prove
that the Lycians erected these tombs in their lifetime for themselves,
wives, and children, and that this was done by several families in
common; they invoke the anger of a goddess Phate--whom the Greeks call
Leto--on those who might dare to violate them. From the nature and
solidity of these tombs and sarcophagi, it is clear that the Lycians
were almost at as much trouble to give a secure resting-place to their
dead as the Egyptians were to give rest to their mummies, while the
ornaments show that the Lycians must have regarded the life after death
as a state of peaceful repose; the sculptures on the tombs invariably
represent friendly scenes of family life, of occupation in the country,
of social life or festal enjoyment. We see mothers with their children,
carriage journeys, riders, processions, banquets, and feasts, and
finally battle-pieces, in which the combatants are partly armed as
Lycians and partly as Greeks. Nothing, not even in the pictures of
battles, reminds us of the horrors of death, or of a judgment in the
under world. The monuments of Lycia prove that the supremacy of the
Persians did not interrupt the progress of Lycian art. But the creations
of the later period enable us to see that Greek art, in her bloom,
obtained and exercised the strongest influence over the Lycians. The
most beautiful monument of Lycia, the tomb of Harpagus, the Persian
satrap, which belongs to the first half of the fourth century, exhibits
a preponderance of Greek forms.

FOOTNOTES:

[688] Strabo, pp. 525, 530, 532, 559.

[689] Kiepert, "Monatsberichte der B. Akad.," 1869, s. 238.

[690] Kiepert, _loc. cit._ s. 239.

[691] Von Gutschmid, "Sächs. Gesell. d. W." 1876, p. 5, _seqq._

[692] Mos. Chor. 1, 10-22.

[693] Mos. Chor. 1, 23-30.

[694] Kiepert, "Monatsberichte der B. Akad.," 1869, s. 222.

[695] Kiepert, _loc. cit._ s. 236.

[696] Kiepert, "Monatsberichte der B. Akad.," 1869, s. 226.

[697] Jer. li. 27; Ezek. xxvii. 14; xxxviii. 6.

[698] Moses Chor. c. 24-30, in Le Vaillant's translation.

[699] Anab. 4, 5.

[700] G. Rawlinson, "Monarch.," 2, 64, 79; Ménant, "Annal.," pp. 49, 64,
73, 82.

[701] G. Smith, "Zeit. fur. ægypt. Sprache," 1869, s. 9-13, 98.

[702] Oppert, "Inscript. des Sargonid.," p. 22, _et seq._, 37;
"Inscript. de DurSarkayan", pp. 14, 21. G. Rawlinson, "Monarchies," 2,
188. According to Oppert's reading the two gods of Arsissa were called
Haldia and Bagabarta.

[703] Joseph. "Antiq.," 1, 3, 6; Kiepert, "Monatsberichte der B. Akad.,"
1869, s. 236.

[704] G. Smith, "Assurb.," 61, 75, 84 _seqq._

[705] Botta, "Monum. de Ninive," 2, pl. 140, 141.

[706] Lenormant, "Lettr. Assyr." 1, 121, 142, reads Belitdur and Menuas
Hincks read Niriduris and Kinuas.

[707] Mordtmann, "Zeit. d. d. M. G.," 26, 484 ff.

[708] Herod. 7, 73; 8, 138.

[709] Strabo, p. 471.

[710] Herod. 7, 75; Thucyd. 4, 75; Xenoph. "Anab." 6, 4, 2; Strabo, p.
541, 542.

[711] Otto Abel, "Makedonien," s. 57 ff.

[712] Lassen, "Zeit. d. d. M. G.," 10, 369 ff.

[713] Herod. 2, 2.

[714] Justin, "Hist.," 11, 7; Plut. "Alex.," c. 18; Arrian, "Anab.," 2,
3; Steph. Byzant, [Greek: Gordieion]; Pausan. 1, 4, 5.

[715] Aristoph. "Plut.," 287; Ovid, "Metamorph.," 11, 146.

[716] Arist. "Pol." 8, 55.

[717] Diod. 3, 59.

[718] Herod. 7, 26; Xenoph. "Anab." 1, 2, 8.

[719] Fragm. 128, ed. Müller.

[720] A communication from Kiepert.

[721] Pollux, 9, 83; Heracl. Pont. Fragm. 11, ed. Müller.

[722] Euseb. "Chron." 2, 82, ed. Schöne.

[723] [Plato, "Phaedr." 264 D. (Jowett.)]

[724] Diog. Laert. 1, 89; Simonid. Fragm. 57, ed. Bergk; Herod. 1, 14,
35; Strabo, p. 61; "Bergk-Griech. Litteratur-Gesch." 1, 779. The date of
the second Midas is fixed by the observation of Herodotus that the
dedicatory offerings of Midas were older than those of Gyges, and by the
date of the first invasion of the Cimmerians, which will be ascertained
below: the second invasion of the Cimmerians took place far later, in
the time of Ardys of Lydia, _i.e._ at a time when monarchy was no longer
in existence in the Greek cities. Hence I believe that the Midas of the
tomb must be distinguished from the Midas of the dedicatory offering.

[725] The upper inscription of this tomb is as follows: "Ates arkiaevos
akenanogavos Midai lavaltaie vanaktei edaes;" the lower is: "Baba
memavais proitavos kphizan avozos sikeman edaes."--Leake, "Asia Minor,"
p. 22-36; Barth, in Petermann "Geog. Mittheilungen," 1860, s. 91-93;
Lassen, in "Zeit. d. d. M. G." 10, 372. For "lavaltaie" R. Stuart reads
"na-" or "gavaltaie."

[726] Strabo, p. 569; Vitruvius, 2, 1, 5.

[727] Perrot, "Exploration," pp. 218, 224.

[728] Hamilton, "Asia Minor," 1, 95-98, 401, 451; 2, 233-252.

[729] Lucian, "Jup. Trag." c. 8. 42.

[730] Etym. Magn. [Greek: Amma.]

[731] Diod. 3, 59; Livy, 29, 14.

[732] Arist. "Rhet." 3, 2; Ovid. "Fast." 4, 265; Arnoh. "Adv. Gent." 9,
5, 4.

[733] Diod. 3, 59.

[734] Herod. 1, 94. In Hippolytus ("Philosoph." 5, 9, p. 118, ed.
Miller) Atys is called the sun of Rhea. Agdistis appears to have been
androgynous; Paus. 7, 17, 5. Hesych. [Greek: Agdistis]. The chief
priests at Pessinus were always called Atys, according to the
inscriptions of Sivrihissar, cf. Polyb. 22, 20.

[735] Plut. "De Isid." 69.

[736] Arnob. "Adv. Gent." 5, 16; Herodian, 1, 10.

[737] Hippolyt. _loc. cit._, p. 119.

[738] "Il." 3, 187; Hym. Ven. 112.

[739] "Bacch." 55 ff., 120 ff.; Diod. 3, 57.

[740] Herod. 1, 173, and H. Stein _ad loc._; Choerilus in "Joseph. c.
Apion." 1, 22.

[741] "Anab." 1, 2, 21 ff.

[742] Blau, "Num. Achaem. Aram-persic," p. 5.

[743] Lassen, "Zeit. d. d. M. G." 10, 385.

[744] Herod. 7, 91; 5, 118; 7, 98; Xenoph. "Anab." 7, 8, 25.

[745] H. Stein, on Herodotus, 1, 74.

[746] Hellan. fragm. 158, ed Müller.

[747] Berosi Fragm. 12, ed. Müller; Abyd. Fragm. 7, ed. Müller. That
Anchialensium should be read instead of Atheniensium need not be proved
at length.

[748] Arrian, "Anab." 2, 5; Athen. p. 529; Steph. Byz. [Greek:
Anchialê].

[749] Ménant, "Annal." pp. 107, 228, 231, 242; G. Smith, "Assurbanipal,"
p. 62.

[750] Æsch. "Persae," 326; Herod. 3, 90; 7, 91, 98; Xenoph. "Anab." 1,
2, 12.

[751] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 348 ff., 354, 497 ff., 574.

[752] 1, 72; cf. 5, 62.

[753] "Il." 2, 857.

[754] "Prom. Vinct." 613-617.

[755] Sandwich, "Siege of Kars," p. 35 of translation. On the Murad
Tshai, near Charput, the best iron is still procured.

[756] Herod. 1, 72; 7, 72.

[757] Fragm. incert. 150, ed. Bergk.

[758] Scymn. Ch. 943.

[759] "Peripl. P. E." c. 20, ed. Müller.

[760] Plut. "Lucull," 23.

[761] C. 89, 90.

[762] Strabo, p. 533, 544, 737; cf. Schol. Apoll. Rhod. 1, 948.

[763] Brandis, "Münzwesen," 308, 427; Blau, "Phoeniz. Münzkunde," 2,
12, 19. These, and the reasons given above, seem to me sufficient to
prevent my agreeing to Lassen's opinion ("Zeit. d. d. M. G." 10, 377)
that the Cappadocians were an Indo-Germanic tribe.

[764] Herod. 4, 1, 10-12; 1, 103, 104.

[765] "Odyss." 11, 14-19.

[766] "Ranae," 187.

[767] Scym. Ch. 239, 240; Strabo, 244; Virgil, "Aen." 3, 441; Plin.
"Hist. Nat." 3, 9.

[768] Callinus, apud Strabo, 648; Herod. 1, 6, 15, 16; 4, 12.

[769] Aristot. apud Steph. Byz. [Greek: Antandros]: Scymn. Ch. 941.

[770] [Greek: Trêres].

[771] Strabo, p. 61, 552, 494. On p. 647 we find "The Treres, a
Cimmerian nation."

[772] Strabo, p. 552.

[773] Strabo, p. 20, 149, 573.

[A] Strabo, p. 61.

[774] Strabo, pp. 627, 647, 61. That in this passage, where Madys is
mentioned a second time with the epithet: the Cimmerian, [Greek:
Skythês] must be read instead of Madys, as Madys has been mentioned just
before, is self-evident.

[775] Thuc. 2, 96; Strabo, p. 59; Theopomp (Fragm. 313, ed. Müller) call
them Trares.

[776] Herod. 1, 6; Plut. "Marius," 11.

[777] Justin. 2, 4.

[778] Strabo, p. 545; Euseb. "Chron." ann., 1260; Syncell. p. 401, ed.
Dind. Cf. Xenophon, "Anab." 4, 8; Steph. Byzant. [Greek: Trapezous].

[779] Orosius, 1, 21: "Anno ante urbem conditam tricesimo" (Orosius
follows the Catonian era), "tunc etiam Amazonum gentis et Cimmeriorum in
Asiam repentinus incursus plurimam diu lateque vastationem et stragem
edidit." Grote ("History of Greece," 3, 334) objects that if this
statement is allowed to hold good for the Cimmerians, we are justified
in making the same conclusions for the Amazons, who would thus become
historical. The Amazons are connected with the Cimmerians because the
land round Sinope was the abode of the Cimmerians, and it was in this
place that the Amazons were said to have dwelt. I too should be inclined
to give the less weight to the testimony of Orosius, as the number 30
may be a corruption for 300. But the other evidence given is enough to
prove that the Cimmerians immigrated into Asia Minor in the period
between 750 and 700 B.C., and settled round the Halys at the mouth of
the river.

[780] Above, p. 517.

[781] Ménant, "Annal." p. 242; G. Smith, "Assurbanipal," pp. 64-72.

[782] Syncell. "Chron." p. 49; Kiepert, "Monatsber. Berl. Akad." 1859,
p. 204.

[783] Perrot, "Explor. Archéol. de la Galatie," pp. 339, 340, 371.

[784] H. Barth, "Reise von Trapezunt nach Skutari," s. 42 ff; Perrot,
_loc. cit._ p. 328 ff.

[785] Barth, "Monatsberichte der Berl. Akad." 1859, s. 142 ff.; Perrot,
"Explor. Archéol. de la Galatie," pp. 330 ff. 352-356.

[786] Perrot, "Explor. Archéol. de la Galatie," p. 157.

[787] Diod. 3, 57; Strabo, pp. 535-537, 557, 559; Plut. "Sulla," c. 9;
Hirt. "Bell. Alex." 66.

[788] "Il." 3, 184-190.

[789] Pausan. 1, 2, 1; Appian, "Bell. Mithrid." 78.

[790] "Prom. Vinct." 723, Suppl. 287. In other passages, following the
later view, he places them in Scythia.

[791] Frag. 25, ed. Müller.

[792] Strabo, p. 505.

[793] Herod. 9, 27; Plut. "Menex." p. 239; Isocr. "Panegyr." 19.

[794] Diod. 2, 45, 46; 3, 55; Strabo, p. 505; Schol. Apoll. Rhod. 2,
949.

[795] Callim. "in Dian." 237.

[796] "Il." 2, 814; Ephori Fragm. 87, ed. Müller; Pausan. 7, 2, 7.
According to Diodorus, Priene and Pitane were also founded by the Amazon
Myrina, 3, 55.

[797] Plut. "Thes." 27, 28; Pausan. 2, 32; 3, 25; Diod. 4, 28.

[798] Herod. 4, 189; Diod. 3, 52-55.

[799] Herod. 4, 110-117; Plato, "Legg." p. 804; Hippocr. "De aere," c.
17; Ephor. fragm. 78, 103, ed. Müller; Ctes. fragm. 25-28, ed. Müller.
Justinus (2, 4), as remarked, represents Ilinus, and Skolopitus, as
making their way from Scythia to the Thermodon, and when these Scythians
had for many years plundered their neighbours from this centre, they
were attacked and cut down by the conspirators among their neighbours.
Their wives remained; they seized the weapons, and founded a female
kingdom. In order to preserve the race, they came together with the
neighbouring people, but they slew all the male children. Marpesia and
Lampedo, who called themselves daughters of Mars, ruled over this female
kingdom. Then Lampedo with a part of the Amazons marched out and founded
Ephesus, and many other cities; over those who remained behind, when
Marpesia was slain, Antiope and Oreithyia reigned; and in their time
Heracles and Theseus came and carried off two sisters of Antiope. To
avenge this act Oreithyia marched against Athens, supported by the
Scythian king Sagillus, and his son Panasagorus. After Oreithyia,
Penthesilea reigned; after her reign the power of the Amazons declined.
Cf. Steph. Byzant, _s. v._ [Greek: Amazones], where the story which
Herodotus (4, 1-4) tells of the returning Scythians of Madyas is turned
to the advantage of the Amazons.

[800] Plut. "Alex." 46; Curtius, 6, 5; Diod. 17, 77; Strabo, p. 505;
Justin, 2, 4; 12, 3. Cf. Arrian, "Anab." 4, 15.

[801] Arrian, _loc. cit._ 7, 13.

[802] Plut. "Pompeius," c. 35; Appian, "Bell. Mithrid." c. 103.

[803] Strab, pp. 503-505, 547, 550, 552.

[804] Hippoc. "De aere," c. 89, 91. If the name Amazon were Greek, it
could only have been invented in a contrast to [Greek: polymazos], "with
many breasts," the epithet of the Ephesian Artemis, as the goddess of
birth, to denote the maidens devoted to chastity.

[805] Strabo, pp. 591, 680.

[806] Herod. 1, 7, 94; 4, 45; Dion. Hal. 1, 27, 28; "Il." 2, 461;
Strabo, p. 627; Steph. Byz. [Greek: Asia].

[807] Herod. 1, 84; Xanth. Fragm. 10; Nicol. Damasc. Fragm. 26, 29, ed.
Müller. The legend of Meles is obviously connected with the founding of
Sardis. This Meles therefore cannot be identified with the Heracleid
(the last but two) of the same name. In Nicolaus, Moxus is the successor
of Meles; Fragm. 24, 49.

[808] Xanth. Fragm. 11, 12; Nicol. Dam. Fragm. 25, 28, ed. Müller.

[809] Diod. 4, 21.

[810] Ephor. Fragm. 9; Pherecyd. Fragm. 3, 4; Mæandri Mil. Fragm. 8;
Clearch. Sol. Fragm. 8, ed. Müller; Apollod. 2, 6, 3.

[811] Pliny, "Hist. Nat." 25, 5. Cf. Nicol., Dam. Fragm. 49, ed. Müller,
where Sadyuttes and Lixus are mentioned in the place of the Heracleidæ
as the successors of Tylon, _loc. cit._ p. 382, 384.

[812] Herod. 1, 7. According to Apollodorus (2, 7, 8), the son of
Omphale and Heracles was Agelaus; according to Diodorus (4, 31) Heracles
first begot Cleodæus with a slave, and then Lamus with Omphale. Others
call the son of Omphale and Heracles Meleus (Meles). Others again
represent Sandon, the son of Heracles, as the father of Damalisandus, or
Dalisandus, by Damalis. Cf. Müller, on Nicol. Fragm. 28.

[813] Joh. Lyd. "De Mens." 3, 14.

[814] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 168, 386.

[815] Hesych. [Greek: Attagathê Atharê para tô Xanthô.] The native name
Athar-ath is found on a coin of Bambyke, in Brandis, _loc. cit._ s. 431.

[816] Joh. Lyd. "De Mag." 3, 64; Plut. "Quæst. Graec." c. 45; "An seni
resp." c. 4; Clearch. Sol. Fragm. 6, ed. Müller; Ovid. "Heroid." 83-118;
"Fast." 2, 325.

[817] Hupfeld, "Res Lyd." pp. 55, 63, 67.

[818] Joh. Lyd. "De Mens." 4, 46; Lucian. "Dial. Deor." 13, 2.

[819] Compare the Lydian names Sandonis and Sandoces in Herod. 1, 71; 7,
194.

[820] Oppert, "Expéd. en Mesopot." 2, 337.

[821] E. Schrader, "Theol. Studien und Kritiken," 1874, 2, 330.

[822] Herod. 1, 93; Athen. pp. 515, 516.

[823] Strabo, p. 641; Paus. 7, 2, 7.

[824] Herod. 3, 48; 8, 105.

[825] Paus. 1, 21; Kiepert, "Monatsberichte d. Berl. Akademie," 1866, s.
298.

[826] Steph. Byz. _s. v._

[827] Lassen, "Z. d. d. M. G." 10, 382 ff; cf. G. Curtius, "Grundzüge."

[828] Herod. 5, 102.

[829] Herodotus (1, 7) says twenty-two generations. But as these,
according to the length which he assumes for a generation, would give a
much longer interval than 505 years, he can only mean twenty-two
sovereigns. That lists of kings existed in Lydia is proved by the
considerable number of names of Atyadæ given in Xanthus.

[830] Cf. H. Stein on the passages of Herodotus quoted; in one class of
MSS. Alcæus, Belus, and Ninus are not found. The city of Ninoë has been
already mentioned (p. 567).

[831] The year 549 B.C., the year of the capture of Sardis, will be
proved below. I believe that we ought to maintain this statement.
Herodotus' total of 170 years for the dynasty of Gyges is untenable in
the face of the Assyrian monuments. According to them Gyges and Ardys
were contemporaries of Assurbanipal, who reigns from 668 to 626 B.C.
Hence for the 170 years of Herodotus we must adopt the number given by
Eusebius, which is 30 years less, and the separate dates of the latter.

[832] Boeckh, "Metrologie," s. 76.

[833] Herod. 1, 94.

[834] Plut. "De Mus." 6; Steph. Byz. [Greek: Asias].

[835] "Il." 18, 291; 10, 431.

[836] P. 572.

[837] Pausan. 2, 22, 3; 5, 13, 7.

[838] Æsch. "Pers." 52; Herod. 7, 74.

[839] Strabo, p. 604, 605, 612; Pausan. 10, 12, 6.

[840] Strabo, p. 469; Plut. "De Fluviis," c. 13.

[841] Herod. 1, 171; 5, 119.

[842] Thuc. 1, 8; Isoc. "Panath." p. 241. On the Carians in Samos and
Chios, see Diod. 5, 84; Strabo, p. 457, 633-637, 661; Paus. 7, 2, 5, 8,
9, 10.

[843] Archiloch. Fragm. 23, ed. Bergk; Euseb. "Chron." 1, 321, ed.
Auch.; cf. Bunsen, "Ægypten," 5, 4, 5, s. 427.

[844] Herod. 5, 118, 119; Strabo, p. 660.

[845] "Il." 2, 872.

[846] Alcæus and Anacreon in Strabo, p. 661; Herod. 1, 171.

[847] Brandis, "Münzwesen," s. 338.

[848] "Quæst. Græcæ," c. 45.

[849] Lassen, "Zeit. d. d. M. G.," 10, 381.

[850] Boeckh, "Corp. Inscript." 26, 93.

[851] Ælian, "Hist. Anim." 12, 30.

[852] 1, 173; 7, 92.

[853] Heracl. Pont. Fragm. 15; Nicol. Damasc. Fragm. 129, ed. Müller.

[854] Strabo, p. 664.

[855] Strabo, p. 665.

[856] Herod. 1, 182; Serv. ad Æneid, 4, 143. Pausanias (1, 19, 3) says
that the Lyceum at Athens was a sanctuary of Apollo Lyceus; the "Iliad"
(5, 171) represents Lycaon as ruling in Lycia.

[857] Lassen, "Z. d. d. M. G." 10, 335 ff; Blau, _ibid._ 17, 667.

[858] Steph. Byzant., [Greek: Arna]: Fellowes, "Lyc. Coins," pl. 12, 7.

[859] Blau ("Z. d. d. M. G." 17, 649 ff) sustains the first view,
Savelsberg and M. Schmidt the second; M. Schmidt, "Lyc. Inscript."

[860] Fellowes, "Account," p. 174, 194; "Lyc. Coins," pl. x. 1, 2, 3.

[861] Ross, "Kleinasien," s. 57.

[862] Lassen, "Z. d. d. M. G." 10, 348.

[863] Ross, "Kleinasien," s. 51.

[864] Ross, _loc. cit._ s. 35.



  THE END.


  LONDON:
  R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS,
  BREAD STREET HILL,
  QUEEN VICTORIA STREET.


       *       *       *       *       *




BY PROFESSOR MOMMSEN.

THE HISTORY OF ROME,

From the Earliest Time to the Period of its Decline.

BY THEODOR MOMMSEN.

_Translated with the Author's sanction, and Additions by the_ REV. P. W.
DICKSON; _to which is added an Introduction by_ DR. SCHMITZ.

  =THE LIBRARY EDITION=, in Four Vols., Demy 8vo., with Index, 75_s._
      The Index (8vo.) separately, 3_s._ 6_d._; but the Volumes not
      sold separately.

  =THE PEOPLE'S EDITION=, in Four Vols., Crown 8vo., with Index,
      46_s._ 6_d._; or the Volumes sold separately: Vols. I. and II.,
      21_s._; Vol. III., 10_s._ 6_d._; Vol. IV., with Index, 15_s._
      The Index (Crown 8vo.) separately, 3_s._ 6_d._

"A work of the very highest merit; its learning is exact and profound;
its narrative full of genius and skill; its descriptions of men are
admirably vivid. We wish to place on record our opinion that Dr.
Mommsen's is by far the best history of the Decline and Fall of the
Roman Commonwealth."--_Times._

"Since the days of Niebuhr, no work on Roman History has appeared that
combines so much to attract, instruct, and charm the reader. Its
style--a rare quality in a German author--is vigorous, spirited, and
animated. Professor Mommsen's work can stand a comparison with the
noblest productions of modern history."--_Dr. Schmitz._

"This is the best history of the Roman Republic, taking the work on the
whole; the author's complete mastery of his subject, the variety of his
gifts and acquirements, his graphic power in the delineation of natural
and individual character, and the vivid interest which he inspires in
every portion of his book. He is without an equal in his own sphere. The
work may be read in the translation (executed with the sanction of the
author) not only with instruction, but with great pleasure."--_Edinburgh
Review._

"A book of deepest interest, and which ought to be translated."--_Dean
Trench._

"Beyond all doubt to be ranked among those really great historical works
which do so much honour to our own day. We can have little hesitation in
pronouncing this work to be the best complete Roman History in
existence. In short, we have now, for the first time, the complete
history of the Roman Republic, really written in a way worthy of the
greatness of the subject. Dr. Mommson is a real historian; his powers of
research and judgment are of a very high order; he is skilful in the
grasp of his whole subject, and vigorous and independent in his way of
dealing with particular questions. And an English critic may be allowed
to add, that his book is far easier and more pleasant to read than many
of the productions of his fellow-countrymen."--_National Review._

"An original work, from the pen of a master. The style is nervous and
lively, and its vigour fully sustained. This English translation fills
up a gap in our literature. It will give the school-boy and the older
student of antiquity a history of Rome up to the mark of present German
scholarship, and at the same time serve as a sample of historical
inquiry for all ages and all lands."--_Westminster Review._




AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.

THE HISTORY OF GREECE.

From the German of Professor Ernst Curtius.

BY A. W. WARD, M.A.

In Five Vols., Demy 8vo., 84_s._: or separately, Vols. I. and II., each
15_s._; Vols. III., IV., and V., with Index, each 18_s._

"A history known to scholars as one of the profoundest, most original,
and instructive of modern times."--_Globe._

"We cannot express our opinion of Dr. Curtius' book better than by
saying that it may be fitly ranked with Theodor Mommsen's great
work."--_Spectator._



RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET.

Publishers in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen.


       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Mixed fractions in this text version are indicated with a hyphen and
forward slash. For example, four and a half is represented by 4-1/2.

3. Footnotes have been renumbered and moved to the end of the chapters
in this text version.

4. The original text includes Greek characters. For this text version
these letters have been replaced with transliterations.

5. Certain words use oe ligature in the original.

6. Obvious errors in punctuation have been silently corrected.

7. Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies in
spelling, hyphenation, and ligature usage have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of Antiquity, Vol. I (of
VI), by Max Duncker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF ANTIQUITY ***

***** This file should be named 38677-8.txt or 38677-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/8/6/7/38677/

Produced by Adrian Mastronardi and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Annouchka, by Ivan Sergheievitch Turgenef

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Annouchka
       A Tale

Author: Ivan Sergheievitch Turgenef

Translator: Franklin P. Abbott

Release Date: April 11, 2012 [EBook #39427]
Last updated: April 22, 2012

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNOUCHKA ***




Produced by sp1nd, Mebyon, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                           ANNOUCHKA

                             A Tale

                 BY IVAN SERGHEÏEVITCH TURGENEF

   _TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF THE AUTHOR'S OWN TRANSLATION_

                       BY FRANKLIN ABBOTT


    BOSTON
    CUPPLES, UPHAM AND COMPANY
    1884

    _Copyright_,
    BY FRANKLIN P. ABBOTT,
    1884.

    _All Rights Reserved._

    C. J. PETERS AND SON,
    ELECTROTYPERS AND STEREOTYPERS,
    145 HIGH STREET.




ANNOUCHKA.




I.


I was then five-and-twenty,--that was a sufficient indication that I had
a past, said he, beginning. My own master for some little time, I
resolved to travel,--not to complete my education, as they said at the
time, but to see the world. I was young, light-hearted, in good health,
free from every care, with a well-filled purse; I gave no thought to the
future; I indulged every whim,--in fact, I lived like a flower that
expands in the sun. The idea that man is but a plant, and that its
flower can only live a short time, had not yet occurred to me. "Youth,"
says a Russian proverb, "lives upon gilded gingerbread, which it
ingenuously takes for bread; then one day even bread fails." But of what
use are these digressions?

I travelled from place to place, with no definite plan, stopping where
it suited me, moving at once when I felt the need of seeing new
faces,--nothing more.

The men alone interested me; I abhorred remarkable monuments, celebrated
collections, and _ciceroni_; the _Galerie Verte_ of Dresden almost drove
me mad. As to nature, it gave me some very keen impressions, but I did
not care the least in the world for what is commonly called its
beauties,--mountains, rocks, waterfalls, which strike me with
astonishment; I did not care to have nature impose itself upon my
admiration or trouble my mind. In return, I could not live without my
fellow-creatures; their talk, their laughter, their movements, were for
me objects of prime necessity. I felt superlatively well in the midst of
a crowd; I followed gayly the surging of men, shouting when they
shouted, and observing them attentively whilst they abandoned themselves
to enthusiasm. Yes, the study of men was, indeed, my delight; and yet is
study the word? I contemplated them, enjoying it with an intense
curiosity.

But again I digress.

So, then, about five-and-twenty years ago I was living in the small town
of Z., upon the banks of the Rhine. I sought isolation: a young widow,
whose acquaintance I made at a watering-place, had just inflicted upon
me a cruel blow. Pretty and intelligent, she coquetted with every one,
and with me in particular; then, after some encouragement, she jilted me
for a Bavarian lieutenant with rosy cheeks.

This blow, to tell the truth, was not very serious, but I found it
advisable to give myself up for a time to regrets and solitude, and I
established myself at Z.

It was not alone the situation of this small town, at the foot of two
lofty mountains, that had impressed me; it had enticed me by its old
walls, flanked with towers, its venerable lindens, the steep bridge,
which crossed its limpid river, and chiefly by its good wine.

After sundown (it was then the month of June), charming little German
girls, with yellow hair, came down for a walk in its narrow streets,
greeting the strangers whom they met with a gracious _guten abend_. Some
of them did not return until the moon had risen from behind the peaked
roofs of the old houses, making the little stones with which the streets
were paved scintillate by the clearness of its motionless rays. I loved
then to wander in the town of Z.; the moon seemed to regard it
steadfastly from the depths of a clear sky, and the town felt this look
and remained quiet and on the alert, inundated by the clearness that
filled the soul with a trouble mingled with sweetness. The cock at the
top of the gothic steeple shone with a pale reflection of gold; a
similar reflection crept in little golden serpents over the dark depths
of the river; at narrow windows, under slated roofs, shone the solitary
lights. The German is economical! The vine reared its festoons
mysteriously over the walls. At times a rustling could be heard in the
obscurity near an old empty well upon the public square of the town; the
watchman replied to it by a prolonged whistle, and a faithful dog
uttered a deep growl. Then a breath of air came so softly caressing the
face, the lindens exhaled a perfume so sweet, that involuntarily the
chest dilated more and more, and the name of Marguerite, half in
exclamation, half in appeal, arose to the lips.

The town of Z. is about a mile from the Rhine. I often went to admire
that magnificent river, and I whiled away entire hours at the foot of a
gigantic ash, dwelling, in my reveries, upon many things, among others,
but not without a certain effort, upon the image of my faithless widow.
A little madonna, with almost infantine features, whose breast showed a
red heart, pierced with swords, looked at me in a melancholy way from
the midst of the branches. Upon the opposite side of the river, rose up
the town of L., a little larger than that in which I was living. I went
one evening as usual to take my seat upon my favorite bench; I looked in
turn at the water, the heavens, and the vines. Opposite me some
tow-headed children clambered over the tarred hull of a boat that had
been left upon the sands of the river, bottom up. Little boats, with
sails puffed out by the breeze, advanced slowly; greenish waves passed
before me, creeping along, swelling out a little, and then going down
with a feeble murmur. Suddenly I thought I distinguished the sound of an
orchestra, which re-echoed in the distance. I listened; they were
playing a waltz in the town of L. The double bass pealed out at
intervals, the violin squeaked confusedly, the whistlings of the flute
were quite distinct. "What is it?" I asked of an old man who was
approaching me. He wore, after the custom of the country, a plush
waistcoat, blue stockings, and buckled shoes.

"They are students, who have come from B. for a _commersch_," he
replied, after shifting his pipe to the other side of his mouth.

"Let us see what is a _commersch_," I said to myself: "besides I have
not seen the town of L." I hailed a boatman, and had him take me across
the river.




II.


Many people, no doubt, are ignorant of what this word _commersch_ means.
Thus they designate a _fête_ to which come all the students of the same
country or of the same society to take part (_Landsmannschaft_). Most of
the young men who resort to these gatherings wear the traditional
costume of the German students, a frogged surtout, large boots, and a
small cap, the lace of which is of the color of the country. The
students assemble for the banquet, over which presides a _Senior_, or
the oldest of the band, and remain at table until morning. They drink;
they sing the _Landesvater_, the _Gaudeamus_; they smoke; they laugh at
the Philistines, and often indulge in the luxury of an orchestra.

It was a gathering of this kind that was taking place in the garden of
the hotel, with the sign of the _Soleil_. The house and garden, which
looked upon the street, were draped with flags; the students were seated
at tables under the lindens; an enormous bull-dog was lying under one
of the tables; in a corner, under a thicket of ivy, were seated the
musicians, who were playing their best, imbibing quantities of beer to
keep themselves in working order. A great number of curious townspeople
were assembled in the street, before the rather high railing of the
garden, the good citizens of the town of L. not wishing to let slip an
occasion to examine closely the guests who had come among them. I joined
the group of spectators. I could observe with pleasure the faces of the
students; their embracings, their exclamations, the innocent presumption
of youth, their enthusiastic glances, their impulsive laughter,--the
best kind of laughter, that joyful ebullition of a life yet full, that
impetuous flight towards no matter what aim, providing it was forward,
that _abandon_ full of thoughtlessness, touched and captivated me. Why
should I not join them? I asked myself.

"Annouchka, have you not had enough of this?" suddenly said in Russian a
man's voice behind me. "Stay a little longer," answered a woman's voice
in the same language. I turned quickly, and my looks fell upon a man
some young man in a riding-coat and cap; he had on his arm a young girl,
very small, whose straw hat almost concealed her features.

"You are a Russian?" I asked of them, with a start which I could not
help.

"Yes, we are Russian," answered the young man, smiling.

"I did not expect," I said to him, "in a foreign country to meet"--

"Nor we either," said he, interrupting me. "Allow me," continued he, "to
make ourselves known to you; my name is Gaguine, and here is"--he
hesitated a moment--"here is my sister. And you, monsieur?"

I in turn told him my name, and we engaged in conversation. I learned
that Gaguine was travelling, like myself, for pleasure, and that, having
arrived about a week ago at L., he had settled himself there for the
time being.

I must confess I do not like to become intimate with Russians in a
foreign country. As far as I can see them, I easily recognize their
walk, the cut of their clothes, principally the expression of their
face. This expression, supercilious and scornful in its nature, at
times imperious, suddenly assumes a cautious and even a timid air. They
appear seized with a kind of restlessness; their eyes disclose a strange
anxiety: "Seigneur! have I not said something foolish; are they laughing
at me by chance?" their look seems to ask. Then one sees them again
assume their majestic calmness, until a new feeling of uneasiness
comes to trouble them. Yes, I say it again, I avoid all intercourse with
my fellow-countrymen; nevertheless, at first sight, I felt attracted
towards Gaguine. There are in the world such happy faces that one takes
pleasure in looking at them, they reflect a warmth which attracts and
does one good, as if one had received a caress. Such was Gaguine's, with
large eyes as soft as the curls of his hair, and a voice whose sound
made you divine that he had a smile upon his lips.

The young girl whom he called his sister at first sight appeared to me
charming. There was an expression quite peculiar, piquant and pretty at
times, upon her round and slightly brown face; her nose was small and
slender, her cheeks chubby as a child's, her eyes black and clear.
Though well proportioned, her figure had not yet entirely developed.
Withal there was no resemblance to her brother.

"Will you come home with us?" said Gaguine to me. "It seems to me that
we have looked long enough at these Germans. Russians by this time would
have broken up the glasses and chairs; but these young fellows before us
are too reserved. Come, Annouchka, is it not time to return home?"

The young girl assented by a nod of the head.

"We live out of town," added Gaguine, "in a small isolated house upon a
hill, surrounded by vines. You shall see whether it is pretty! Come, our
landlady has promised to make us some cheese-rennet. Besides the day is
on the wane, and you will cross the Rhine more securely by moonlight."

We proceeded. A few moments after we passed through the low gate of the
town, which was surrounded by an old stone wall that still preserved
some battlements. We advanced into the country; after going along by the
side of an old wall a hundred paces, we stopped before a little door;
Gaguine opened it and made us ascend a steep path, upon the sides of
which were rows of vines.

The sun was just setting; a faint purple hue tinged the vines, the props
that sustained them, the parched earth covered with pieces of slate, as
well as the white walls of a little house, all the bright windows of
which were framed in black bars, and towards which the footpath that we
were climbing guided us.

"Here is our stopping-place!" cried Gaguine, when were a little way from
the house, "and there's our landlady, too, bringing us some milk. _Guten
abend_, madam," cried he. "We are going to have our frugal repast at
once; but first," said he, "look about you and tell me what you think of
the view."

The site that he showed me was, indeed, admirable. At our feet the
silvery waters of the Rhine, illumined by the purple of the setting sun,
flowed between the verdant banks. The town, peacefully placed on the
river banks, displayed to our eyes all its houses and all its streets;
the hills and fields stretched out about it.

If that which was at our feet was beautiful, more lovely still was the
sight above our heads. One was struck by the depth and clearness of the
heavens, the transparency and brilliancy of the atmosphere. Clear and
light, the undulations of the breeze moved softly about us; that also
seemed to take delight in the heights.

"You have chosen an admirable place to live in," I said to Gaguine.

"It is Annouchka who found it out," he replied to me. "Come, Annouchka,
give your orders. Have them bring everything here; we will sup in the
open air, that we may hear the music better. Have you noticed," added
he, turning to me, "that such music as a waltz near at hand seems
detestable; heard at a distance, charms and makes all the poetic chords
of your heart vibrate."

Annouchka directed her steps towards the house, and soon returned
accompanied by the landlady. They brought an enormous dish of milk,
spoons, plates, sugar, fruits, and bread. We seated ourselves and began
to eat. Annouchka took off her hat; her black hair, cut short, fell in
large curls over her ears and her neck. My presence appeared to
embarrass her; but Gaguine said to her, "don't be shy; he will not bite
you."

These words made her smile, and a few moments after she spoke to me
without the least embarrassment. She did not remain quiet a moment.
Hardly was she seated than she arose, ran towards the house, and
reappeared again, singing in a low voice; often she laughed, and her
laugh had something strange about it--one would say that it was not
provoked by anything that was said, but by some thoughts that were
passing through her mind. Her large eyes looked one in the face openly,
with boldness, but at times she half closed her eyelids, and her looks
became suddenly deep and caressing.

We chatted for about two hours. It was some time since the sun had gone
down, and the evening light, at first resplendent with fire, then calm
and red, later on confused and dim, mingled little by little with the
shades of night. Yet our conversation still went on. Gaguine had a
bottle of Rhine wine brought; we drank it slowly. The music had not
stopped, but the sounds that the wind brought us seemed sweeter. In the
town and upon the river lights began to spring up. Annouchka suddenly
lowered her head, her curly hair fell over her brow, then she became
silent and sighed. In a few moments she told us that she was sleepy and
went into the house. I followed her with my eyes, and saw her sitting a
long time motionless in the shadow behind the closed window. At last the
moon appeared on the horizon, and its rays made the waters of the Rhine
scintillate softly. Everything before us suddenly changed; brightness,
then darkness, sprang up in every direction, and the wine, even in our
glasses, assumed a mysterious appearance. There was no longer any wind;
it ceased suddenly, like a bird that folds its wings; a delicate and
warm perfume arose from the ground.

"It is time to go!" I exclaimed, "otherwise I shall not find a boatman."

"Yes, it is time," replied Gaguine. We took the path that came down the
mountain. Suddenly we heard some pebbles rolling behind us; it was
Annouchka, who was coming to rejoin us.

"You did not go to bed then?" said her brother.

She did not reply, but ran down before us. Some of the lamps that the
students had to light up the garden still threw a dying glimmer, which
lighted up the foliage of the trees, at the foot of which they burnt,
and gave to them a solemn and fantastic appearance. We found Annouchka
upon the bank; she was talking with the boatman. I jumped into the boat
and took leave of my new friends. Gaguine promised me a visit the next
day. I gave him my hand, which he pressed; I offered the other to
Annouchka, but she contented herself by looking at me and nodding her
head. The boat was set loose from the bank, and the current carried it
along with rapidity. The boatman, a robust old man, plunged his oars
energetically into the dark waters of the river.

"You are going into the reflection of the moon," cried Annouchka; "you
have broken it."

I looked upon the river, its dim shadows crowded about the boat.

"Adieu," she said once more.

"To-morrow, then," added Gaguine.

The boat reached the shore; I jumped out of it and looked behind me, but
I no longer saw any one on the other bank. The reflection of the moon
spread out again, like a bridge of gold, from one bank of the river to
the other.

The last chords of a waltz of Lanner's could be heard, as if bidding me
a farewell. Gaguine was right; these far-away sounds moved me strangely.

I regained the house through the fields, shrouded in a profound
obscurity, inhaling slowly the balmy air; and when I had re-entered my
little room, I felt troubled to the bottom of my soul by the confused
expectation of an undefined happiness. What do I say? I was already
happy; why? I could not have told what I wanted, nor of what I was
thinking, and yet I was happy.

At the time this superabundance of strange and delicious sensations
almost made me laugh; I quickly went to bed, and just as I was closing
my eyes I suddenly remembered that I had not thought the whole evening
of my faithless one.--What does this mean, I asked myself; is it that I
am no longer in love? But that question remained unanswered, and I slept
like a child in its cradle.




III.


The next morning, being awake, but not yet up, I heard the sound of a
walking-stick echoing under my window, and a voice that I recognized as
that of Gaguine, pouring forth the following song:--

    "Si je trouve encor dans les bras du sommeil,
    Je viens te reveiller au bruit de ma guitare."[1]

[Footnote 1: Verse from Romance of Glinker.]

I hastened to open the door to him.

"Good-morning," said he, entering, "I disturb you very early, but the
weather is so fine. See what a delicious freshness, the dew, the singing
of the larks"--

And, indeed, he, with his rosy cheeks, his curly hair, and his half-bare
neck, had all the freshness of morning.

I dressed myself; we went into my little garden and took a seat upon a
bench; they brought our coffee there, and we began to talk.

Gaguine told of some of his future plans; having a fine fortune and
dependent upon no one, he wished to devote himself to painting, and
regretted only that he had taken it up so late, he had lost so much
valuable time. I in turn confided to him the plans that I had formed,
and took advantage of the opportunity to make him the confidant of my
unhappy love affair. He listened patiently, but I could see that the
sufferings of my heart had but little interest for him. After having
listened to my story for politeness' sake, with two or three sighs, he
proposed that we should go and see his sketches. I immediately
consented. We started. Annouchka was not at home. The landlady informed
us that she must be at the ruins. They so called the remains of an old
feudal castle, which was situated a mile or so from the town. Gaguine
opened all his portfolios. I found that his sketches had much life and
truth, something broad and bold; but none were finished, and the drawing
appeared to me incorrect and careless.

I frankly expressed my opinion.

"Yes, yes," he replied, sighing, "you are right; all that is bad, and it
is not matured by reflection. What am I to do? I have not worked
enough; our cursed Slavic indolence always ends in getting the better of
me! Whilst the work is still but an idea, like an eagle soaring in the
air, we believe ourselves able to move the world; then at the moment of
execution come weaknesses, and then--weariness."

I offered him some words of encouragement, but he interrupted me with a
wave of the hand, picked up his sketches, and threw them in a heap upon
the sofa.

"If perseverance does not fail me, I shall succeed," said he, between
his teeth; "otherwise, I shall vegetate as a country squire, never
amounting to anything.

"Let us go and look for Annouchka!"




IV.


The road that led to the ruins ran along the side of a narrow and wooded
dell. At the bottom a rapid stream rushed noisily over the stones, as if
in a hurry to lose itself in the great river, which was seen in the
distance behind the dark rampart of steep mountains. Gaguine called my
attention to several very harmonious effects of color, and his words
revealed to me, if not a painter of talent, at least a true artist. The
ruin was soon before us. It was at the top of a barren rock, a square
tower, entirely blackened, quite intact, but nearly split from top to
bottom by a deep crack. Walls covered with moss were attached to the
tower. Ivy clung here and there; stunted shrubbery sprang out of grayish
embrasures and caved-in vaults; a stony path led to an entrance door
standing upright. We were not far from it when a woman's figure appeared
suddenly before us, leaped lightly upon a heap of rubbish, and stood
erect upon the projection of a wall at the edge of a precipice.

"I am not mistaken!" exclaimed Gaguine; "it is Annouchka. How foolish of
her!"

We passed through the door, and found ourselves in a small court almost
entirely filled with nettles and wild apple trees. It was, indeed,
Annouchka, sitting upon the projection of the wall. She turned her head
towards us and began to laugh, not moving from her place; Gaguine shook
his finger at her, and raising my voice, I reproached her for her
imprudence.

"Be quiet," Gaguine said, in my ear; "let her do it; you have no idea of
what she is capable when provoked; she would climb to the top of the
tower. Admire rather the industrious spirit of the people of the
country."

I turned and saw in a corner a booth of boards, on the floor of which
was squatting an old woman knitting stockings, looking at us from under
her spectacles. She had for sale beer, cakes, and seltzer water, for the
use of tourists.

We seated ourselves upon a bench and began to drink foamy beer from
heavy tin goblets. Annouchka still remained seated in the same place,
her feet curled under her, her head enveloped in her muslin scarf; her
charming profile outlined clearly against the blue sky; but I looked at
her with some irritation. I believed the evening before that her manners
were affected and unnatural. She wishes to astonish us, I thought; but
why? what a childish whim. You would say that she had divined my
thought, for, throwing upon me a quick penetrating glance, she began to
laugh, descended from the wall in two jumps, then, approaching the old
woman, she asked her for a glass of water.

"You think I wish to drink?" she said to her brother; "no, I wish to
water the flowers upon the wall yonder that are dying and dried up by
the sun."

Gaguine did not reply; she left us, her glass in her hand, and climbed
once more upon the ruins. Stopping at intervals she stooped and poured
out with a comic gravity some drops of water that sparkled in the sun.
Her movements were very graceful; but I still watched her with
disapproval, admiring, however, her nimbleness and activity. Coming to
a dangerous place she purposely alarmed us by giving a little cry and
then began to laugh. That was the finishing stroke to my impatience.

"She is a regular goat," muttered the old woman, who had stopped
working.

Having emptied the last drop of water from her glass, Annouchka at
length arose to rejoin us, approaching with a defiant manner. A strange
smile for a moment contracted her lips and her eyebrows and dilated her
nostrils; she half closed her black eyes with a provoking air of
mockery.

"You think my conduct unbecoming," her face seemed to say; "no matter, I
know that you admire me."

"Perfect! charming! Annouchka," said Gaguine.

Suddenly the young girl appeared to feel a sense of shame, and lowering
her eyes, she came and sat by us like a culprit. For the first time I
examined her features closely; and I have rarely seen more mobile ones.
A few moments had scarcely elapsed before her face lost all color and
took an expression approaching almost to sadness; it even seemed to me
that her features assumed grandeur, artlessness. She appeared entirely
absorbed.

We explored the ruins minutely. Annouchka kept behind us, and we began
to admire the view. When the dinner hour arrived, Gaguine paid the old
woman, and asked from her a last jug of beer; then turning to me, he
said with a shy smile:--

"To the lady of your thoughts!"

"He has then--you have then a lady of whom you think?" asked Annouchka.

"And who has not?" replied Gaguine.

Annouchka remained thoughtful for some moments, the expression of her
face changed again, and a smile of defiance, almost impudent, appeared
once more upon her lips.

We again took our way to the house, and Annouchka again began to laugh
and frolic with more affectation than before. Breaking a branch from a
tree, she shouldered it like a gun, and rolled her scarf about her head.
I remember that we then met a large family of English people, with light
hair, looking awkward; all, as if obeying a word of command, threw upon
Annouchka their blue eyes, in which was depicted a cold look of
astonishment; she began to sing in a loud voice, as if to defy them.
When we arrived, she immediately went to her room, and did not reappear
until dinner, decked out in her finest dress, her hair dressed with
care, wearing a tight-fitting bodice, and gloves on her hands. At table
she sat with dignity, scarcely tasted anything, and drank only water. It
was evident she wished to play a new rôle in my presence: that of a
young person, modest and well-bred. Gaguine did not restrain her; you
could see that it was his custom to contradict her in nothing. From time
to time he contented himself with looking at me, faintly shrugging his
shoulders, and his kindly eye seemed to say: "She is but a child; be
indulgent." Immediately after dinner she rose, bowed to us, and, putting
on her hat, asked of Gaguine if she could go and see Dame Louise.

"How long have you been in need of my permission?" he replied, with his
usual smile, which this time, however, was slightly constrained; "you
are tired of us, then?"

"No; but yesterday I promised Dame Louise to go and see her; besides, I
think you would be more at your ease without me. Monsieur," she added,
turning to me, "you will--you will perhaps, have some more confidences."

She left us.

"Dame Louise," said Gaguine, trying to avoid my look, "is the widow of
the old burgomaster of the town. She is rather a plain, but an excellent
old woman. She has a great liking for Annouchka, who, moreover, has a
mania for becoming intimate with people below her; a mania that, as far
as I can observe, almost always springs from pride."

"You see," added he, after a moment's silence, "that I treat Annouchka
like a spoiled child, and it could not be otherwise; I could not be
exacting towards any body, how much less towards her?"

I did not reply. Gaguine began to talk upon another subject. The more I
learned to know him the more he inspired me with affection. I soon
summed up his character; it was a fine, good Russian nature,
straightforward, upright, and unaffected, but unfortunately wanting in
energy and earnestness. His youth did not give forth passion and ardor,
but shone with a sweet and dim light. He had wit and charming manners,
but how difficult to conjecture what would become of him when he became
a man! An artist--no! Every art calls for hard work, unceasing efforts;
and never, I said to myself, in looking at his calm features, listening
to his languid voice, never could he bind himself to constant and
well-directed work. And yet it was impossible not to like him; one
became attached to him involuntarily. We passed nearly four hours
together, sometimes side by side upon the sofa, sometimes walking slowly
before the house, and our talk ended by uniting us. The sun went down,
and I was thinking about going home.

Annouchka had not yet returned.

"Ah, what a wayward child!" exclaimed Gaguine. "Wait, I will see you
home; would you not like to have me? As we go we will stop at Dame
Louise's and see if she is yet there; it will not be much out of the
way."

We descended into the town, and after following for a short time a
narrow and winding street, we stopped before a high, four-storied
house, with but two windows in front; the second story projected over
the street more than the first, and in the same manner the other two.
This strange habitation, with its Gothic arches, placed upon two
enormous posts and topped with a pointed tiled roof, and a dormer
window, surmounted by an iron crane extended in the form of a beak, had
the effect of an enormous bird meditating.

"Annouchka, are you there?" cried Gaguine.

A lighted window opened in the third story, and we perceived the brown
head of the young girl. Behind her appeared the toothless face of an old
German woman, her eyes weak with age.

"Here I am," said Annouchka, leaning coquettishly on the window-sill. "I
like it very well. Wait, take this," added she, throwing to Gaguine a
slip of geranium. "Imagine to yourself that I am the lady of your
thoughts."

Dame Louise began to laugh.

"He is going away," replied Gaguine; "he wishes to bid you farewell."

"Really?" said Annouchka. "Well, then, as he is going, give him the
flower. I will come home very soon."

She quickly closed the window, and I thought I saw her embrace the old
German. Gaguine offered me the flower in silence. Without saying a word
I put it in my pocket, and returning to the place where they cross the
river, I passed over to the other side. I recollect walking towards my
house with a singularly sad heart, though thinking of nothing, when a
perfume well known to me, but rare enough in Germany, attracted my
attention. I stopped, and saw near the road a plot of ground sown with
hemp. The perfume that this plant of the steppes gave out suddenly
transported me to Russia, and brought forth in my soul a passionate
enthusiasm towards my country; I conceived the ardent desire of
breathing my native air, and feeling again under my feet the soil of my
fatherland. "What am I doing here?" I exclaimed; "What interest have I
in wandering in a strange land, among people who are nothing to me?" and
the oppression that filled my heart soon gave way to an emotion violent
and full of bitterness.

I re-entered my house in a state of mind the opposite to that of the
night before; I felt almost vexed, and was long in calming myself. I
felt a deep vexation, for which I could not account. I ended by sitting
down, and recalling my faithless widow (she came to my recollection
officially every evening); I took one of her letters, but did not open
it, for my thoughts took wing to the other side of the river. I began to
dream, and Annouchka was the subject. I recalled that in the course of
our conversation; Gaguine gave me to understand that certain
circumstances prevented him from returning to Russia.--"Who knows,
indeed, if she is his sister," I asked myself aloud.

I laid down and tried to sleep, but an hour after I was still leaning on
my elbow, and thinking again of that capricious little girl with a
forced laugh. She has the figure of _La Galathée_ of Raphael of the
Farnese palace, I murmured.--It is well that--and she is not his sister.
During this time the widow's letter reposed quietly upon the floor,
lighted up by a pale ray of the moon.




V.


The next morning I returned to L. I persuaded myself that I should take
the greatest pleasure in seeing Gaguine, but the fact is that I was
secretly impelled by the desire of knowing how Annouchka would
behave,--if she would act as strangely as the night before. I found them
both in the parlor; and a singular thing,--but perhaps because I had
been dreaming so long of Russia,--Annouchka seemed to me entirely
Russian. I found in her the air of a young girl of the people, almost
that of one of the servants. She wore quite an old dress, her hair was
drawn back behind her ears, and, seated near the window, she was quietly
working at her embroidery, as if she had never done anything else in her
life. Her eyes fixed upon her work, she scarcely spoke, and her features
had an expression so dull, so commonplace, that I was involuntarily
reminded of Macha and Katia[2] at home. To complete the resemblance she
began to hum the air,--

    O, ma mère, ma douce Colombe![3]

[Footnote 2: Diminutives of Mary and Catherine.]

[Footnote 3: National Russian air.]

While observing her face, the dreams of the night before came back to
mind, and without knowing why, I felt an oppression in my heart. The
weather was magnificent.

Gaguine told us he intended to go out to sketch. I asked permission to
accompany him if it would not trouble him.

"On the contrary," he said, "you can give me some good advice."

He put on his blouse, donned his round Van Dyck hat, took his portfolio
under his arm, and started out. I followed him. Annouchka remained at
home. On leaving, Gaguine begged her to see that the soup was not made
too thin. She promised to keep her eye on the kitchen.

Leading me into the valley, with which I was already familiar, Gaguine
seated himself upon a stone, and began to draw an old tufted oak.

I stretched myself upon the grass and took a book, but read two pages of
it at the most. Gaguine, on his side, made but a poor daub. In return
we did not fail to discuss very fully, and, in my opinion, not without
judgment and justness, the best method to follow to work with profit,
the dangers to avoid, the end to be aimed at, and the mission of the
true artist in the age in which we live. Gaguine ended by declaring that
to-day he did not feel sufficiently in spirits, and came and stretched
himself at my side. Then we gave ourselves up to the irresistible
temptation of one of those conversations so dear to youth, conversations
sometimes enthusiastic, sometimes pensive and melancholy, but always
sincere and always vague, in which we Russians love so much to indulge.
After having talked to satiety, we took the road to the town, very well
satisfied with ourselves, as if we had just accomplished a difficult
task, or brought a great enterprise to a good end. We found Annouchka
exactly as we left her. I observed her with the utmost attention; I
could discover in her neither the slightest shade of coquetry, or
indication denoting a studied part; it was impossible this time to find
in her any vestiges of oddity.

"Decidedly," said Gaguine, "she is fasting and doing penance."

Towards evening she yawned two or three times without the least
affectation, and went to bed early. I took leave of Gaguine soon after,
and, going home, I did not allow myself to dream. The day came to an end
without my mind suffering the least trouble, only it seemed to me, as I
lay down, that I said involuntarily aloud,--

"Oh! that little girl--she is, indeed, an enigma. And yet," added I,
after a moment's reflection, "and yet she is not his sister!"




VI.


A fortnight elapsed after these events. I went every day to make Gaguine
a visit. Annouchka seemed to shun me, and no longer indulged in those
head-shakings that had annoyed me so much in the first days of our
acquaintance. She seemed to conceal a grief or a secret trouble; she
laughed more rarely. I continued to observe her with curiosity.

French and German were quite familiar to her, but a number of things
made me divine that she had been without a woman's care in her infancy,
that she had received a strange, desultory education, quite different
from that of Gaguine. In him, in spite of his blouse and Van Dyck hat,
you quickly discovered the Russian gentleman, nonchalant and slightly
effeminate; she in no wise resembled a noble lady. All her movements
implied a kind of restlessness; she was a seedling newly grafted, a wine
that yet fermented. Naturally timid and distrustful of herself, she was
vexed at feeling _gauche_, and sought in spite of it to give herself an
unconstrained and bold manner, but not always with success. Several
times I led the conversation to her past, and her way of living in
Russia; I saw that she replied with a bad grace to my questions. All
that I could learn was that at the time she left Russia she was living
in the country. One day I found her alone and reading; her head leaning
on her hands, her fingers thrust in her hair, she was devouring the book
before her with her eyes.

"Bravo!" I cried, approaching. "What, a love of study?"

She raised her head, and, looking at me with a serious and dignified
air, "You thought, then, I could do nothing but laugh?" she said, and
she rose to leave.

I glanced at the title of the book; it was a bad French novel.

"You might have made a better choice," I said to her.

"What must I read, then?" she cried, and, throwing her book upon the
table, she added: "Then, in that case, I am going to amuse myself." And
she ran towards the garden.

The same day, in the evening, I read to Gaguine _Herrman and Dorothea_.
As I began to read, Annouchka went to and fro incessantly, then suddenly
she stopped, listened, seated herself quietly beside me, and gave me her
attention to the end.

The next day I was again surprised in no longer seeing the old
Annouchka. I began to comprehend that she had suddenly taken into her
head to be a housewife, wrapped up in her duties, like Dorothea. Finally
her character seemed inexplicable to me. In spite of the excessive
_amour propre_ that I found in her, I felt attracted towards her, even
when she made me angry. One thing, at least, appeared certain, and that
was that she was not the sister of Gaguine. I did not find in him
towards her the conduct of a brother; on her side too much respect and
compliance, too little constraint.

A strange circumstance seemed, according to all appearances, to
strengthen my suspicions. One evening, approaching the hedge which
surrounded Gaguine's house, I found the gate closed. Without stopping at
this obstacle I reached a place where, some days before, I had noticed
that a part of the hedge was destroyed, and I jumped into the enclosure;
some distance from there, a few steps from the path, there was a little
arbor of acacias; scarcely had I passed it than I distinguished the
voice of Annouchka, who cried out with fervor, weeping,--

"No, I shall never love any one but you; no, no, it is you alone whom I
wish to love, and forever!"

"Come, calm yourself," replied Gaguine, "you know very well that I
believe you." Their voices left the arbor. I could see them through the
thin foliage; they did not observe me.

"You, you only," she repeated; and, throwing herself on his neck, she
clung to him with convulsive sobs, covering him with kisses.

"Calm yourself, calm yourself," he kept repeating, passing his hand over
the hair of the young girl.

I remained quiet for some moments, then I came to my senses.--Should I
approach them? "No, not for the world," I immediately said.

I quickly regained the hedge, and, passing it at a stride, I again took
the road to my house, running. I smiled, I rubbed my hands, I wondered
at the chance that had unexpectedly confirmed my suppositions; the least
doubt seemed no longer possible, and at the same time I felt in my heart
an intense bitterness.

"I must confess," I said to myself, "that they can dissimulate well! But
what is their object? And I--why should they make me their dupe? I
should not expect such a thing from him. Then, what a melodramatic
scene!"




VII.


I passed a bad night. Rising early in the morning, I threw over my
shoulders my travelling bag, warned my landlady that I would not return
during the day, and walked by the side of the mountains, along the
river, upon the borders of which was situated the little town of L.
These mountains, whose chain bears the name of _Hundsrüch_ (Dog's Back)
are of a very curious formation; especially noticeable were columns of
basalt very regular and of great purity of shape, but at the moment I
hardly thought of making any geological observations. I could not
account for the way I felt, only I was conscious that I no longer wished
to persuade even myself that the only cause of the sudden estrangement
with which they inspired me was my chagrin at being deceived by them.
Nothing obliged them to give themselves out as--brother and sister.
Finally I tried to banish the remembrance of them from my mind.

I wandered at leisure over mountains and valleys; I made some long stops
in the village inns; engaging in a quiet conversation with the landlord
and travellers, or else, lying down upon a flat stone, warmed by the
sun, I looked at the clouds floating by. Happily for me the weather was
beautiful. It was thus I occupied my leisure for three days, and I found
in doing so a certain charm, though at times I felt depressed. The state
of my mind was in perfect accord with the tranquil nature of these
regions.

I abandoned myself entirely to chance, to all the impressions that
happened to strike me. They followed each other slowly and left in the
depths of my soul a general sensation, in which mingled harmoniously all
that I had seen, felt, and heard for the last three days; yes,
everything, without exception, the penetrating odor of rosin in the
woods, the cries and the tappings of the woodpecker, the incessant
rushing of the clear streams, with speckled trout playing on the sandy
bottom, the undulating outlines of the mountains, the towering rocks;
the neat little villages, with their respectable old churches; the
storks in the meadows, the pretty mills with clattering wheels, the
stout figures of the countrymen with their blue waistcoats and gray
stockings, the lumbering carts drawn slowly by heavy horses and
sometimes by cows, young travellers, with long hair, walking in groups
on the smooth streets, bordered with pear and apple trees.

I still find a charm in the remembrance of these impressions.

Hail to you! humble corner of German soil, abode of a modest comfort,
where one meets at every step traces of a diligent hand, of a work slow,
but full of perseverance, to you my vows and my reverence!

I returned home only on the evening of the third day. I have forgotten
to say that, in my chagrin against Annouchka, I attempted to revive in
my thoughts the image of my stony-hearted widow, but had my labor for my
pains. I remember that as soon as I recalled her, I found myself face to
face with a little girl of about five years of age, with a round and
innocent face, with eyes animated with a naïve curiosity. She looked at
me with such a candid expression that I felt quite ashamed before her
glance; it was distasteful for me to lie even to myself in her presence,
and my old idol disappeared from my remembrance forever.

Arriving home, I found a letter from Gaguine; he spoke of the
astonishment that my sudden disappearance had caused him; reproached me
for not having taken him for a companion, and begged me to come and see
him as soon as I returned.

This letter caused me a painful impression; nevertheless, I started for
L. the next day.




VIII.


Gaguine gave me a friendly greeting, and loaded me with affectionate
reproaches. As to Annouchka, as if she did it on purpose, as soon as she
saw me, she burst out laughing without the slightest cause, and
immediately fled, as usual. Gaguine appeared embarrassed, stammered out
that she was foolish, and begged me to excuse her. I confess that, being
already displeased, I was so much the more wounded by this forced
merriment and strange affectation. I feigned, however, to attach no
importance to it, and related to Gaguine the details of my little
excursion. On his side, he informed me of what he had done during my
absence; nevertheless the conversation languished, while Annouchka kept
coming in and out of the room. I brought this to an end by pretending
unavoidable work, and manifested my intention of leaving. Gaguine
attempted at first to detain me; then, bestowing a searching glance at
me, offered to accompany me. In the outer room Annouchka came up
suddenly and offered me her hand. I just touched the ends of her fingers
and scarcely bowed.

I crossed the Rhine with Gaguine, and when we were near the ash of the
little Madonna we seated ourselves upon the bench to admire the view.
Then we entered into a conversation I shall never forget.

We at first exchanged some commonplaces, then there was a silence. We
fixed our eyes upon the transparent waters of the river.

"I should like to know what you think of Annouchka," said Gaguine
suddenly, with his usual smile. "Does she not appear somewhat
fantastic?"

"Yes," I replied, much surprised at the question, as I hardly expected
him to venture upon such ground.

"That comes from not knowing her; thus you cannot judge her well," said
he. "She has an excellent heart, but a very bad head. You must bear a
great deal from her! You would not reproach her if you knew her
history."

"Her history?" I exclaimed; "is she not then your"--

Gaguine stopped me with a look.

"You are not going to imagine that she is not my sister?" he replied,
without paying any attention to my embarrassment. "Yes, she is indeed
the daughter of my father. Give me your attention. I have confidence in
you and am going to tell you everything.

"My father was an excellent man, having intelligence and a cultivated
mind, but whose life was nevertheless very sad. It was not that he was
more ill-used by fortune than any one else, but he had not the strength
to bear a first misfortune. While still young he had made a love
marriage; his wife, who was my mother, did not live long; I was only six
months old when she died. My father then took me into the country, and
for twelve years did not put foot outside of his domain. He himself
began my education, and would never have separated himself from me if
his brother, my paternal uncle, had not come to see him on his estate.
This uncle lived at Petersburg, and he held an important position there.
He succeeded in persuading my father to confide me to his care, so that
he would never need to leave his estate; he represented to him that
isolation was injurious to a boy already grown, and who in the hands of
a preceptor as sad and stern as my father would be far behind children
of my own age, and that even my character would suffer.

"My father resisted his attempts for a long time, but finally yielded. I
cried on being separated from him, for I loved him, though I had never
seen a smile upon his lips. Arrived at Petersburg, I soon forgot the
sad, dark place where my infancy was passed. I entered the military
school, then a regiment of the Guard. I went every year to pass some
weeks in the country. Each time I found my father more morose, more
reserved and pensive, until at times he became fierce. He went every day
to church, and almost entirely lost the habit of talking.

"During one of these visits (I was about twenty years of age) I
perceived for the first time a slight girl with black eyes, about twelve
years old; it was Annouchka. My father told me she was an orphan whom he
took care of, and I paid but little attention to this child, wild,
silent, and active as a young fallow deer. When I entered my father's
favorite room, the vast chamber where my mother died, and so dark that
they kept it lighted in broad day, Annouchka hid herself behind a large
arm-chair or the bookcase. It happened that for three or four days after
this last visit I was prevented by my duties from returning to my
father's, but every month I received a few lines from his hand, in which
he rarely spoke of Annouchka, and always without going into any details
of the subject. He was already over fifty, but appeared still a young
man. You may imagine the shock when I suddenly received a letter from
our steward, in which he announced to me that my father was dangerously
ill, and implored me to come as soon as possible if I wished to see him
before he died.

"I started immediately, and travelled with the greatest speed, and found
my father still living, but just about to breathe his last. He was
delighted to see me again, and clasped me in his emaciated arms,
fastening his glance upon me, which appeared at once to fathom my
thoughts and to address me a mute prayer, and making me promise to
fulfil his last wish, he ordered his old valet to bring Annouchka into
his room.

"The old man led her in; she could hardly stand, trembling all over.

"'Now,' said my father with an effort, 'I confide to your care my
daughter, your sister; Iskof will relate everything to you,' he added,
designating his old servant.

"Annouchka began to sob and fell upon the bed, hiding her face. Half an
hour after, my father expired.

"This is what I learned: Annouchka was the daughter of my father and of
an old waiting maid of my mother, named Tatiana. I recollect Tatiana
very well. She was tall, with large, dark eyes, noble, severe, and
intelligent features, and passed for a proud girl, rather
unapproachable. As far as I could understand by the simple story with
respectful omissions that Iskof related, my father did not notice
Tatiana until several years after the death of my mother. At that time
Tatiana no longer lived in the manor-house, but with one of her married
sisters, charged with looking after the courtyard. My father had taken a
fancy to her, and when I left the country he even thought of marrying
her, but she resisted all his entreaties. 'The dead Tatiana
Vlassievna,' said Iskof, standing reverentially near the door, his hands
behind his back, 'was a person of great good judgment; she did not wish
to bring prejudice against your father,'--'I become your wife, mistress
here, you can't think of it?' she cried, thus addressing your father in
my presence." Inflexible upon this point, Tatiana would not even change
her abode; she continued to live at her sister's with Annouchka. When I
was a child I often remember having seen Tatiana on fête-days at church.
A dark handkerchief on her head, a yellow shawl thrown over her
shoulder, she stood with the other villagers near a window. Her stern
profile stood out clearly against the panes, and she prayed with modest
gravity, bowing profoundly after the custom of the old time, and
touching the earth with the end of her fingers before touching it with
her forehead.

"At the time my uncle took me away, little Annouchka was only two years
old; she was nine when she lost her mother. After the death of Tatiana,
my father took the child to his own house. Already he had several times
expressed a wish to do so, but Tatiana was always opposed to it. You
may imagine what Annouchka must have felt when she found herself
established in the house of him they called "the master." Even to the
present time she preserves the remembrance of the day when for the first
time she put on a silk dress, and they made her kiss his hand. Her
mother had brought her up with severity; my father did not place the
least restraint upon her. He charged himself with her education; she had
no other master. He did not spoil her, or load her with useless tasks.
He loved her ardently; he could refuse her nothing. Annouchka soon
learned that she was the principal personage of the house; she knew that
the master was her father; even then she had a feeling of her false
position, and an _amour propre_ unhealthful and full of mistrust sprang
up in her. Some bad habits took root; her _naïveté_ disappeared; she
wished, she confided to me later, to force the whole world to forget her
origin. At times she blushed at it; then, ashamed at her blushes, she
showed that she was proud of her mother. You see that she knew, and
knows still, a great many things which she should have been ignorant of
at her age; but whose fault was it? The passion of youth burst forth
impetuously, and there was no friendly hand to direct her. It is so
difficult to make good use of such entire independence. So, not wishing
to be behind other nobles' daughters, she devoted herself to reading;
but what profit could she derive from it? Her life, begun in a false
way, remained so, but her heart kept pure.

"At this time I was but twenty years of age, and charged with the care
of a young girl of thirteen. For the first few days after my father's
death the sound of my voice was sufficient to throw her into a fever. My
caresses caused her agony; it was but gradually and almost insensibly
that she became accustomed to me. It is true that later, when she saw
that I was thoughtful of her, and loved her as a sister, she became
ardently attached to me; she could feel nothing half way.

"I took her to Petersburg, and though hard for me to leave her, it not
being in my power to keep her near me, I placed her in one of the best
boarding-schools of the city. Annouchka understood the necessity of this
separation, but she fell ill and nearly died. Later she became
accustomed to this kind of life. She remained at boarding-school four
years, and, contrary to my expectation, she came out nearly the same as
she went in. The mistress of the boarding-school often complained of
her. "Punishments have no effect upon her," she told me, "and marks of
affection find her equally insensible." Annouchka was very intelligent;
she studied hard, and in this respect led all her companions; but
nothing could make her comply with the ordinary rules,--she remained
obstinate, and with an unsociable humor. I do not blame her entirely;
she was in a position where there were but two ways of acting open to
her,--a complacent servility or a proud shyness. Among all her
schoolmates, she was intimate with but one, a young girl, quite plain,
poor, and persecuted. The other scholars of the boarding-school, most of
them of the aristocracy, did not like her, and pursued her with their
sarcasms. Annouchka kept aloof from them in every way. One day the
priest charged with their religious instruction spoke of the faults of
youth; Annouchka said aloud: "There are no greater faults than flattery
and meanness." In a word, her character did not change, only her manners
improved, although there was still much to be desired.

"So she reached her seventeenth year. My position was quite
embarrassing; but a happy thought suddenly occurred to me: it was to
leave the service, pass three or four years in a strange country and
take my sister with me. As soon as I conceived this resolution I put it
in execution, and that is why you find us both upon the banks of the
Rhine, I attempting to paint, and she doing anything she wishes,
according to her fancy. Now I hope that you will not judge her too
severely, for I warn you that Annouchka, though pretending to care
nothing about it, is very sensitive to the opinion that others have of
her, and to yours above all."

As he said these last words, Gaguine smiled with his usual calmness. I
pressed his hand with warmth.

"All this is nothing," he replied, "but I tremble for her in the future.
She has one of the most inflammable natures. Up to the present time no
one has pleased her; but if she ever loves, who can tell what may result
from it? I do not at times know how to behave towards her. Imagine those
days when she wished to prove to me that I was cool towards her, whilst
she loved only me, and would never love another man! and while saying
this she would weep bitterly.

"It is for this reason then?--" I began to say, but I immediately
stopped myself.

"Since we are in the chapter of confidences," I replied, "allow me one
question. Is it true that no one has pleased her up to the present time?
Yet at Petersburg she must have seen a great many young people?"

"They were all to the highest degree displeasing to her. You see,
Annouchka was seeking for a hero, an extraordinary man, or some handsome
shepherd living in a mountain cave. But it is time for me to stop; I
detain you," added he, rising.

"No," I said to him, "let us rather go to your house. I don't wish to go
into the house."

"And your work?" he asked of me.

I did not reply to him. Gaguine kindly smiled, and we returned to L. In
again seeing the vineyard and the white house on the mountain, I felt a
peculiarly sweet emotion that penetrated my soul; it was as if balm had
been poured into my heart.

Gaguine's story relieved me greatly.




IX.


Annouchka came to meet us at the threshold of the door. I was expecting
a fresh burst of laughter, but she approached us pale, silent, her eyes
cast down.

"I have brought him back," said Gaguine, "and it is well to add that he
wished to come himself."

She looked at me with a questioning air. I put my hand out to her this
time, and pressed with fervor her cold and trembling fingers. I felt a
profound pity for her. I understood, indeed, the sides of her character
which had appeared inexplicable to me. That agitation one saw in her,
that desire of putting herself forward, joined with the fear of
appearing ridiculous, was quite clear to me now.

A weighty secret oppressed her constantly, her inexperienced _amour
propre_ came forward and receded incessantly, but her whole being sought
the truth. I understood what attracted me towards this strange young
girl: it was not only the half-savage charm bestowed upon her lovely
and graceful young figure, it was also her soul that captivated me.
Gaguine began to rummage over his portfolios; I proposed to Annouchka to
accompany me into the vineyard. She immediately consented, with a gay
and almost submissive air. We went half way down the mountain, and
seated ourselves upon a stone.

"And you were not dull without us?" she asked me.

"You were then dull without me?" I replied to her.

Annouchka looked at me slyly.

"Yes!" she said, and almost immediately began,--

"The mountains must be very beautiful. They are high, higher than the
clouds. Tell me what you saw. You have already told my brother, but I
have not heard."

"But you did not care to hear, since you went out."

"I went out because,--you see very well that I don't go out now," added
she in a tender tone; "but this morning you were angry."

"I was angry?"

"Yes!"

"Come now, why should I have been?"

"I don't know; but you were angry, and went away in the same mood. I was
very sorry to see you go away so, and I am glad to see you come back."

"And I am very glad to be back," I answered.

Annouchka shrugged her shoulders, as children do when they are pleased.
"Oh! I know it," she replied. "I used to know by the way in which my
father coughed whether he was pleased with me or not."

It was the first time that she had spoken of her father; it surprised
me.

"You loved your father very much?" I asked her; and suddenly, to my
great disgust, I felt that I blushed.

She did not answer, and blushed also.

We kept silent for some time. In the distance the smoke of a steamboat
rose up on the Rhine; we followed it with our eyes.

"And your story," she said to me in a low voice.

"Why did you sometimes begin to laugh when you saw me?" I asked her.

"I don't know. Sometimes I feel like weeping, and I begin to laugh. You
must not judge of me by the way I act. Apropos, what is that legend
about the fairy Lorelei? This is her rock that one sees here. They say
that formerly she drowned everybody, until, falling in love, she threw
herself into the Rhine. I like the story. Dame Louise knows a great many
of them; she tells them all to me. Dame Louise has a black cat with
yellow eyes."

Annouchka raised her head and shook her curls.

"Ah! how happy I am," she said. At that moment low, monotonous sounds
began to be heard at intervals,--hundreds of voices, chanting in chorus,
with cadenced interruptions, a religious song. A long procession
appeared on the road below us, with crosses and banners.

"Suppose we join them," Annouchka said to me, listening to the chants
that came to us growing fainter and fainter by degrees.

"You are then very religious?"

"One should go to some place very far away for devotion, or to
accomplish a perilous work!" she added. "Otherwise the days slip
by--life passes uselessly."

"You are ambitious," I said to her. "You do not wish to end your life
without leaving behind some traces of your existence?"

"Is it then impossible?"

"Impossible!" I was going to answer; but I looked at the eyes that shone
with ardor, and confined myself to saying, "Try!"

"Tell me," after a moment's silence, during which indescribable shades
passed over her countenance, which again had become pale. "Then that
lady pleases you very much? You know, the one whose health my brother
drank at the ruins the day after you met us?"

I began to laugh.

"Your brother but jested; no woman was in my mind, or at least is there
now."

"And what is it that you like about women?" she asked, turning her head
with a childlike curiosity.

"What a singular question!" I cried.

Annouchka was immediately troubled.

"I shouldn't have asked you such a question, should I? Forgive me; I am
accustomed to say whatever comes into my head. That is why I am afraid
to speak."

"Speak, I beg you! Fear nothing, I am so delighted at seeing you less
wild."

Annouchka lowered her eyes, and for the first time I heard a sweet low
laugh come from her lips.

"Come, tell me about your trip," she said, arranging the folds of her
dress over her knees, as if to install herself there for a long time;
"begin or recite something to me, that which you read from Onéguine."[4]

[Footnote 4: Poem of Pouchkina.]

She suddenly became pensive, and murmured in a low voice,--

    "Où sont aujourd'hui la croix et l'ombrage
    Qui marquaient la tombe de ma pauvre mère."

"That's not exactly the way that Pouchkina[5] expressed himself," I
said.

[Footnote 5: Instead of "mère," the Russian text says "nourrice."]

"I should like to be Tatiana,"[6] continued she, still pensive. "Come,
speak," she said with vivacity.

[Footnote 6: Heroine of the poem.]

But that was far from my thoughts. I looked at her; inundated by the
warm light of the sun, she seemed to me so calm, so serene.--About us,
at our feet, above our heads, the country, the river, the heavens,--all
were radiant; the air seemed to me quite saturated with splendor.

"See, how beautiful it is," I said, lowering my voice involuntarily.

"Oh, yes, very beautiful," she replied in the same tone, without looking
at me. "If you and I were birds, how we would dart forth into
space--into all that infinite blue! But we are not birds."

"Yes, but we can bring forth wings."

"How's that?"

"Life will teach you. There are many feelings that will raise you above
this earth; never fear, the wings will come to you."

"Have you had any?"

"What shall I say? I don't think that I have taken wing so far."

Annouchka became thoughtful once more. I was leaning over her.

"Can you waltz?" she said to me suddenly.

"Yes," I replied, a little surprised at the question.

"Then come quickly; come. I am going to beg my brother to play us a
waltz. We will pretend that the wings have appeared, and that we are
flying into space."

She ran towards the house. I quickly followed her, and a few moments had
hardly elapsed before we were whirling about the narrow room, to the
sounds of a waltz of Lanner's. Annouchka danced with much grace and
animation. I do not know what womanly charm suddenly appeared upon her
girlish face. Long afterwards the charm of her slender figure still
lingered about my hand; for a long time I felt her quick breathing near
me, and I dreamed of her dark eyes, motionless and half closed, with her
face animated, though pale, about which waved the curls of her sweet
hair.




X.


Nothing could have been more delightful than that day. We amused
ourselves like children. Annouchka was pleasing and artless. Gaguine
regarded her with pleasure. I left them a little later. When I reached
the middle of the Rhine I begged the boatman to let his boat drift down
the river. The old man rested on his oars, and the majestic river
carried us along. I looked about me, listened, and dreamed. Suddenly I
felt a weight at my heart. Astonished, I raised my eyes to the heavens,
but found no quiet there. Studded with stars, the entire heavens seemed
to be moving, palpitating, trembling; I leaned towards the river, but
down there in those cold and dark depths, there, too, were the stars
trembling and moving. Everything appeared incited by a restless
agitation, and my own trouble only increased it. I leaned upon the edge
of the boat. The sighing of the wind in my ears, the rippling of the
water, which made a wake behind the stern, irritated me, and the cold
air from over the water did not refresh me. A nightingale began to sing
near the river bank, and the sweetness of the melodious voice ran
through me like a delicious and burning poison. But they were not tears
from an excitement without cause; what I felt was not the confused
emotion of vague desires,--it was not that effervescence of the soul
which wished to clasp everything in its embrace, because it could
understand and love everything that exists; no, the thirst for happiness
was kindled in me. I did not yet venture to put it into words--but
happiness, happiness to satiety--that was what I wished, what I longed
for. Meanwhile, the boat kept on down the stream, and the old boatman
dozed on his oars.




XI.


While going the next morning to Gaguine's, I did not ask myself if I was
in love with Annouchka, but did not cease to dream of her, to ponder on
her fate; I rejoiced in our unforeseen reconciliation. I felt that I had
not understood her until the previous evening; up to that time she was
an enigma. Now, at length, she was revealed to me; in what an entrancing
light was her image enshrouded, how new she was to me, and what did she
not promise!

I followed deliberately the road that I had gone over so many times,
glancing at every step at the little white house that was seen in the
distance. I thought not of the far-off future; I did not even give a
thought to the next day; I was happy.

When I entered the room Annouchka blushed. I noticed that she had again
dressed herself with care, but by the expression of her face she was not
entirely at her ease, and I--I was happy. I even thought I noticed a
movement to run away, as usual, but, making an effort, she remained.
Gaguine was in that particular state of excitement which, like a fit of
madness, suddenly takes hold of the _dilettanti_, when they imagine that
they have caught Nature in the act and can hold her.

He was standing, quite dishevelled and covered with paint, before his
canvas, bestowing upon it, right and left, great strokes of his brush.

He greeted me with a nod that had something quite fierce about it, going
back a few steps, half closing his eyes, then again dashing at his
picture. I did not disturb him, but went and sat by Annouchka. Her dark
eyes turned slowly towards me.

"You are not the same to-day as you were yesterday," I said, after
vainly trying to smile.

"It is true, I am not the same," she replied in a slow and dull voice;
"but that's nothing. I have not slept well. I was thinking all night
long."

"Upon what?"

"Ah, mon Dieu, upon a great many things. It is a habit of my childhood,
of the time that I still lived with my mother."

She spoke this last word with an effort, but repeated it again:--

"When I lived with my mother I often asked myself why no one knew what
would happen to them, and why, when foreseeing a misfortune, one cannot
avoid it. And why also can one not tell the whole truth. I was thinking
moreover last night that I ought to study, that I know nothing; I need a
new education. I have been badly brought up. I have neither learned to
draw nor to play upon the piano; I hardly know how to sew. I have no
talent, people must be very much bored with me."

"You are unjust to yourself," I replied to her; "you have read a great
deal, and with your intelligence"--

"And I am intelligent?" she asked, with such a curious naïve air that I
could hardly keep from laughing.

"Am I intelligent, brother?" she asked of Gaguine.

He did not reply, but kept on painting assiduously, changing his brush
over and over again, and raising his hand very high at every stroke.

"Really at times I have no idea what I have in my head," replied
Annouchka, still thoughtful. "Sometimes, I assure you, I am afraid of
myself. Ah! I would like--Is it true that women should not read a great
many things?"

"A great many things are not necessary, but"--

"Tell me what I should read, what I should do. I will follow your advice
in everything," added she, turning towards me with a burst of
confidence.

I could not think immediately of what I ought to tell her.

"Come, would you not be afraid that I should weary you?"

"What a strange idea!"

"Well, thanks for that," said she, "I was afraid that you might be
wearied in my society," and with her small burning hand clasped mine.

"I say! N----," cried Gaguine at this moment, "is not this tone too
dark?"

I approached him, and the young girl rose and left the room.




XII.


She reappeared in about an hour at the door, and beckoned me to her.

"Listen," said she; "if I should die, would you be sorry?"

"What singular ideas you have to-day," I exclaimed.

"I don't think that I shall live long; it often seems to me that
everything about me is bidding me good-by. It is better to die than to
live as--Ah! don't look at me so; I assure you that I'm not pretending;
otherwise, I shall begin again to be afraid of you."

"Were you afraid of me then?"

"If I am queer, you must not reproach me. See, already I can no longer
laugh."

She remained sad and preoccupied until the end of the evening. I could
not understand what had come over her. Her eyes often rested upon me; my
heart was oppressed under her enigmatic look. She appeared calm;
nevertheless, in looking at her, I could not keep from saying something
to lessen her trouble. I contemplated her with emotion; I found a
touching charm in the pallor spread over her features, in the timidity
of her indecisive movements. She all the while imagined that I was in a
bad humor.

"Listen," she said to me before I left, "I fear that you do not take me
seriously. In future believe all that I tell you; but you, in your turn,
be frank with me; be sure that I shall never tell you anything but the
truth,--I give you my word of honor!"

This expression, "word of honor," made me smile once more.

"Ah! don't laugh," said she vivaciously, "or I shall repeat what you
told me yesterday, 'Why do you laugh?' Do you remember," added she,
after a moment's silence, "that yesterday you spoke to me of wings?
These wings have sprung forth. I don't know where to fly."

"Come, then," I replied, "all roads are open to you."

She looked at me earnestly for some moments.

"You have a bad opinion of me to-day," she said, frowning slightly.

"I! a bad opinion of you?"

"Why are you standing there, with those dismal faces?" asked Gaguine at
that moment. "Do you wish me to play a waltz for you, as I did
yesterday?"

"No, no," cried she, clasping her hands; "not for the world to-day!"

"Don't excite yourself; I don't wish to force you."

"Not for the world," repeated she, growing pale.

"Does she love me?" I thought, as I approached the Rhine, whose dark
waters rushed rapidly along.




XIII.


"Does she love me?" I asked myself the next morning on awakening. I
feared to question myself more. I felt that her image--the image of the
young girl with the "_rire forcé_"--was engraved on my mind, and that I
could not easily efface it. I returned to L., and remained there the
entire day, but I only caught a glimpse of Annouchka. She was
indisposed; she had a headache. She only came down for a few moments, a
handkerchief wrapped about her forehead. Pale and unsteady, with her
eyes half closed, she smiled a little, and said,--

"It will pass away; it is nothing. Everything passes away, doesn't it?"
and she went out.

I felt wearied, moved by a sensation of emptiness and sadness, and yet I
could not decide to go away. Later on I went home without having seen
her again.

I passed all the next morning in a kind of moral somnolence. I tried to
lose myself by working; impossible, I could do nothing. I tried to
force myself to think of nothing; that succeeded no better. I wandered
about the town; I re-entered the house, then came out again.

"Are you not Monsieur N----?" said suddenly behind me the voice of a
little boy.

I turned about,--a child had accosted me.

"From Mademoiselle Anna."

And he handed me a letter.

I opened it and recognized her handwriting, hasty and indistinct:--

"I must see you. Meet me to-day at four o'clock in the stone chapel, on
the road that leads to the ruins.--I have been very imprudent. Come, for
heaven's sake! You shall know everything. Say to the bearer, Yes."

"Is there any answer?" asked the little boy.

"Say to the young lady, _Yes_," I replied. And he ran away.




XIV.


I went back to my room, and, sitting down, began to reflect. My heart
beat quickly. I read Annouchka's letter over several times. I looked at
my watch; it was not yet noon.

The door opened and Gaguine entered. He looked gloomy. He took my hand
and pressed it fervently. You could see that he was under the influence
of a deep emotion.

"What has happened?" I asked him. Gaguine took a chair, and seated
himself by my side.

"Three days ago," he said to me, with an uneasy smile and a constrained
voice, "I told you some things that surprised you; to-day I am going to
astonish you still more. To another than you, I would not speak so
frankly; but you are a man of honor, and a friend, I hope; then listen.
My sister Annouchka loves you."

I started, and rose quickly.

"Your sister, you tell me--?"

"Yes," he replied bruskly, "I said so. It is foolish; she will drive me
mad. Fortunately, she cannot lie, and confides everything to me. Ah!
what a heart that child has; but she will surely ruin herself!"

"You are certainly in error," I exclaimed, interrupting him.

"No, I am not mistaken. Yesterday she remained in bed the entire day
without taking anything. It is true she did not complain; but she never
does complain. I felt no uneasiness, but towards evening she had a
little fever. About two in the morning our landlady came and awoke me.

"'Go and see your sister,' she said to me; 'I think she is ill.'

"I ran to Annouchka's room, and found her still dressed, consumed with
fever, in tears; her head was on fire; her teeth chattered.

"'What is the matter with you?' I asked.

"She threw herself upon my neck and begged me to take her away, if I
valued her life. Without being able to understand anything, I tried to
calm her; her sobs redoubled, and, suddenly, in the depth of her grief,
she confessed to me,--in a word, I learned that she loves you.--There!
You and I are grown men, governed by reason. Well! we will never
understand how deep are the sentiments that Annouchka feels, and with
what violence they manifest themselves; it is something at once
unforeseen and irresistible, like the bursting of a storm. You are,
without doubt, a very attractive man," continued Gaguine, "but yet, how
have you inspired such a violent passion? I cannot conceive of it, I
confess it! She pretends that, as soon as she saw you, she was attracted
towards you. That is why she wept so much of late in assuring me that
she would never love any one in the world but me. She thinks that you
look down upon her, knowing probably her origin. She asked me if I had
told you her story. I told her No, as you may imagine, but her
penetration frightens me. She had but one thought, that was to go away,
and quickly. I stayed with her until morning. She made me promise that
we should start to-morrow, and only then was she quieted. After mature
reflection, I decided to come and confer with you upon the subject. In
my opinion, my sister is right; the best thing is to leave, and I should
have taken her away to-day if an idea had not occurred to me, and
stopped me. Who knows? Perhaps my sister pleases you; if so, why then
should we part? So I decided, and putting aside my pride, relying upon
some observations that I had made--yes--I decided to come--to come and
ask you"--

Here Gaguine, disconcerted, stopped short.

"Pray excuse me--pardon--I am not accustomed to interviews of this
kind."

I took his hand.

"You wish to know if your sister pleases me!" I said to him firmly. "She
does please me!"

Gaguine fixed his eyes upon me. "But, in short," replied he,
hesitating,--"would you marry her?"

"How can I answer that question. I make you the judge of it.--Can I do
it now?"

"I know it, I know it," cried Gaguine; "no, I have no right to expect an
answer from you, and the question that I have asked you is
unconventional in every particular, but force of circumstances
compelled me to do so. It is not safe to play with fire! You don't
understand what Annouchka is. She may fall ill, or run away, or even--or
even give you a rendezvous. Another would know how to conceal her
feelings and wait, but she cannot. It is her first experience, that's
the worst of it! If you could have seen to-day the way in which she
sobbed at my feet, you would share my fears."

I began to reflect. The words of Gaguine, "_Give you a rendezvous_,"
oppressed my heart. It seemed shameful to me not to answer his honest
frankness by a loyal confession.

"Yes!" I at length said to him, "you are right. I received, about an
hour ago, a letter from your sister; there it is." He took it, ran
through it rapidly, and again let his hands fall upon his knees. The
astonishment that his features expressed would have been laughable, if I
could have laughed at that moment.

"You are a man of honor," he said. "I am not the less embarrassed to
know what to do. How! She asks me to fly, and in this letter she
reproaches herself for her imprudence! But when, then, did she have the
time to write to you? and what are her intentions in regard to you?"

I reassured him, and we applied ourselves, with as much coolness as was
possible, to discuss what we should do. This is the plan which we
finally determined upon to prevent all unhappiness. It was agreed that I
should go to the rendezvous and speak plainly with Annouchka. Gaguine
promised to remain at home, without showing that he had read the letter;
and it was decided, moreover, that we should meet in the evening.

"I have full confidence in you," he said, pressing my hand; "have
consideration for her and for me; but, nevertheless, we will leave
to-morrow," added he, rising, "since it is settled that you will not
marry her."

"Give me until this evening," I replied.

"So be it! you will not marry her!"

He took his departure; I threw myself upon the divan and closed my eyes.
I was dazed; too many thoughts at once crowded into my brain. I was
angry with Gaguine for his frankness; I was angry with Annouchka: her
love filled me with joy--and yet I was afraid of it.

I could not account for her having made a full confession to her
brother. That which above all caused me great pain was the absolute
necessity of making a sudden and almost instantaneous decision.

"Marry a girl of seventeen, with a disposition like that; it is
impossible!" I cried, rising.




XV.


At the hour agreed upon I crossed the Rhine, and the first person I met
on the bank was the same little boy who had found me in the morning. He
seemed to be waiting for me. "From Mademoiselle Anna," he said to me, in
a low voice, and he gave me another note.

Annouchka announced to me that she had changed the place of the
rendezvous. She told me to meet her in an hour and a half--not at the
chapel, but at Dame Louise's; I was to knock at the door, enter, and go
up three flights.

"Again _Yes_?" asked the little boy.

"Yes," I replied, and walked along the river bank. I had not time enough
to return to my house, and did not wish to wander about the streets.

Behind the walls of the town stretched a little garden, with a
bowling-alley covered with a roof, and some tables for beer-drinkers. I
entered it.

Several middle-aged Germans were bowling; the balls rolled noisily
along; exclamations could be heard from time to time. A pretty little
waiting-maid, her eyes swollen from crying, brought me a jug of beer; I
looked her in the face, she turned away bruskly and withdrew.

"Yes, yes!" muttered a stout German with very red cheeks, who was seated
near me; "our Hannchen is in great distress to-day; her sweetheart is
drawn in the conscription." I looked at her at this moment; retiring
into a corner, she was resting her cheek upon her hand, and great tears
slowly rolled between her fingers. Some one asked for beer; she brought
him a jug, and went back to her place. This grief reacted upon me, and I
began to think of my rendezvous with sadness and uneasiness.

It was not with a light heart that I was going to this interview. I must
not give myself up to the joys of a reciprocal love. Must keep to my
word, fulfil a difficult duty. "_It is not safe to play with fire._"
This expression, which Gaguine had used in speaking of his sister,
pierced me like a sharp arrow to the bottom of my soul. Yet three days
before, in that boat carried along by the stream, was I not tormented by
a thirst for happiness? Now I could satisfy it, and I hesitated. I
thrust back this happiness; it was my duty to do so; the unforeseen
something which it presented frightened me. Annouchka herself, with her
impulsive nature, her education, this girl strange and full of
fascination, I confess it, frightened me.

I struggled a long time with these feelings. The moment fixed upon
approached. "I can not marry her," at last I said to myself; "she will
not know that I have loved her."

I arose, put a thaler into poor Hannchen's hand (she did not even thank
me), and proceeded towards the house of Dame Louise.

The shades of night were already in the air, and above the dark street
stretched a narrow band of sky, reddened by the setting sun. I gently
tapped at the door; it was immediately opened.

I crossed the threshold and found myself in complete darkness.

"This way," said a cracked voice, "you are expected."

I groped along in the dark a few steps; a bony hand seized mine.

"Is it you, Dame Louise?" I asked.

"Yes!" answered the same voice, "it is I, my fine young man."

The old woman took me up a very steep staircase, and stopped upon the
landing of the third story. I recognized then, by the faint glimmer from
a little garret window, the wrinkled face of the burgomaster's widow. A
sly and mawkish smile half opened her toothless mouth, and made her dull
eyes glitter. She pointed out a door. I opened it with a convulsive
movement, and slammed it after me.




XVI.


The little room in which I found myself was quite dark, and it was some
moments before I saw Annouchka. She was seated near the window,
enveloped in a large shawl, her head turned away and almost concealed,
like a startled bird. I felt a deep pity for her. I approached; she
turned away her head still more.

"Anna Nicolaëvna!" I said to her. She turned quickly and tried to fasten
her look upon mine, but had not the strength. I took her hand; it was
like a dead person's, motionless and cold in mine.

"I would like," said she, attempting to smile, but her pale lips would
not allow of it; "I would like--no, impossible," she murmured. She was
silent; indeed, her voice grew fainter at every word.

I sat down by her.

"Anna Nicolaëvna!" I said again, and, in my turn, I could say nothing
more. There was a long silence. Retaining her hand in mine, I gazed at
her. Sinking down, she breathed quickly, biting her lower lip, in order
to keep back the tears which were ready to flow. I continued to gaze at
her; there was in her motionless and timorous attitude an expression of
weakness deeply touching. It was as if she had fallen crushed upon the
chair and could not stir. My heart was filled with pity.

"Annouchka!" I said in a low voice. She slowly raised her eyes to mine.
O the look of a woman whose heart has just opened to love! how find
words to describe it?--They beseech, those eyes! they question, they
give themselves up.--I could not resist them--a subtle fire ran through
my veins. I bent over her head and covered it with kisses.--Suddenly my
ear was struck by a trembling sound like a stifled sob. I felt a hand
which trembled like a leaf pass over my hair. I raised my head and saw
her face.--What a sudden transfiguration had come over it!--Fright had
disappeared; her eyes had a far-away look that seemed to ask mine to
join with them; her lips were slightly apart; her forehead was as pale
as marble, whilst her curls floated behind her head, as if a breath of
air had blown them back!

I forgot everything. I drew her towards me. She offered no resistance.
Her shawl slipped from her shoulders, her head fell and rested gently
upon my breast, under the kisses of my burning lips.

"I am yours!" she murmured feebly.

Suddenly the thought of Gaguine flashed across me.

"What are we doing?" I cried, pushing her from me convulsively. "Your
brother knows everything; he knows that we are here together!"

Annouchka fell back upon the chair.

"Yes," I said, rising and going away from her, "your brother knows
everything! I was forced to tell him all."

"Forced?" she stammered. She seemed hardly to understand me.

"Yes, yes," I repeated harshly, "and it is your fault,--yours, yours
alone! What reason had you to give up your secret? Were you forced to
tell your brother everything? He came to me this morning and repeated
all you had told him."

I tried not to look any more at her, and paced the room.

"Now," I replied, "all is lost,--all, absolutely all."

Annouchka attempted to rise.

"Stay!" I cried. "Stay, I beseech you; fear nothing, you have to do with
a man of honor! But, for heaven's sake, speak! What has frightened you?
Have I changed towards you? As to myself, when your brother came to me
yesterday, I could not do otherwise than tell him what our relations
were."

"Why tell her all that?" I thought to myself, and the idea that I was a
cowardly deceiver, that Gaguine was aware of our rendezvous, that all
was disclosed--lost beyond redemption--immediately crossed my mind.

"I did not send for my brother last night," she said, with a choking
voice, "he came of himself."

"But do you see what this has led to? Now you wish to go away."

"Yes, I must go," she said, in a very low voice. "I besought you to come
here to say farewell."

"And you think, perhaps, that to part from you costs me nothing?"

"But why was it necessary to confide in my brother?" replied Annouchka
in a stupefied tone.

"I repeat to you, I could not do otherwise. If you had not betrayed
yourself"--

"I was shut up in my room," she replied naïvely. "I did not know that
the landlady had another key."

This innocent excuse at the moment put me in a rage; and now I cannot
think of it without deep emotion. Poor child, what an upright and frank
soul!

"So all is at an end," I replied once more; "at an end--; and we must
part."

I looked at her furtively. The color mounted to her face; shame and
terror--I felt it only too keenly--seized her. On my side, I walked to
and fro, speaking as if in delirium.

"There was in my heart," I continued, "a feeling just springing up,
which, if you had left it to time, would have developed! You have
yourself broken the bond that united us; you have failed to put
confidence in me."

While I spoke, Annouchka leaned forward more and more.--Suddenly she
fell upon her knees, hid her face in her hands, and began to sob. I ran
to her, I attempted to raise her, but she resisted obstinately.

Woman's tears thoroughly upset me. I cried out to her:--

"Anna Nicolaëvna! Annouchka,--pray, for heaven's sake,--calm
yourself,--I beseech you."

And I took her hand in mine.

But at the moment when I least expected it, she suddenly arose, then,
like a flash, ran towards the door and disappeared.

Dame Louise, who entered the room a few moments later, found me in the
same place, as if struck by a thunderbolt.

I could not understand how this interview could have ended so abruptly,
and in such a ridiculous manner, before I had expressed a hundredth part
of what I had to say; before I even could foresee what the consequences
of it were.

"Mademoiselle has gone?" Dame Louise asked me, raising her yellow
eyebrows.

I looked at her with a stupefied air, and left.




XVII.


I passed through the town and walked straight ahead to the fields. A
feeling of vexed disappointment filled my heart. I loaded myself with
reproaches. Why did I not appreciate the motive that had induced this
young girl to change the place of our meeting? Why did I not appreciate
how hard it would be for her to go to this old woman's house? Why,
finally, did I not stay away?

Alone with her in that dark, isolated room, I had had the courage to
thrust her away, and to remonstrate with her; and, now her image pursued
me, I asked her pardon--her pale face, her eyes timid and full of tears;
her hair in disorder, flowing over her bended neck; the touch of her
forehead as it rested upon my breast; all these remembrances made me
beside myself, and I thought I still heard her murmuring, "I am yours!"

I reflected: I have obeyed the voice of my conscience.--But no? it was
false! for, most certainly, I should never have wished in my heart for
such a _dénouement_.--And, then, to be separated from her, to live
without her, shall I have the strength?--"Fool! miserable fool that I
am!" I cried angrily.

In the meantime night was approaching. I directed my hurried steps
towards the dwelling of Annouchka.




XVIII.


Gaguine came out to meet me.

"Have you seen my sister?" he cried, from a distance.

"She is not at home then?" I asked him.

"No."

"Not returned?"

"No."

"No,--but I have something to confess," continued he: "in spite of the
promise I made you, I couldn't help going to the chapel. I didn't find
her there. Did she not go there, then?"

"No, not to the chapel."

"And you have not seen her?"

I was obliged to admit that I had seen her.

"Where then?"

"At Dame Louise's.--I left her about an hour ago; I thought she was
about to return."

"We will wait for her," Gaguine said to me.

We entered the house, and I sat down beside him. We were silent; a
painful constraint was on us both. On the alert for the least sound,
sometimes we looked at each other stealthily, sometimes we cast our eyes
upon the door.

"I can stay here no longer!" said he, rising; "she will kill me with
anxiety. Come, let us look for her."

"Yes, let us do so!"

We went out; it was already night.

"Come, tell me what happened," demanded Gaguine, drawing his hat over
his eyes.

"Our interview lasted but five minutes at the utmost, and I spoke to her
as we agreed upon."

"Do you know," said he, "I think we had better separate. Let us look for
her each on his own responsibility; that is the quicker way to find her;
but in any case return to the house in an hour."




XIX.


I hastened down the path that passed through the vineyards and entered
the town; after hurrying through all the streets and looking in every
direction, even at Dame Louise's windows, I came back to the Rhine, and
ran along the river bank. Here and there was a figure of a woman, but
none of them Annouchka's. It was no longer vexation that consumed me,
but a secret terror; still more it was repentance that I felt, boundless
pity, finally love--yes, the deepest love. I threw my arms about; I
called Annouchka; at first, as the shades of night were deepening, in a
low voice, then louder and louder; I repeated a hundred times that I
loved her, swearing never to leave her; I would have given all that I
possessed to press once more her cold hand, to hear once more her timid
voice, to see her once more before me. She had been so near me; she had
come to me with such resolution, in all the frankness of her heart; she
had brought me her young life, her purity,--and I did not take her in
my arms; I had foregone the happiness of seeing her sweet face
brighten.--The thought drove me mad!

"Where can she have gone? what could she have done?" I cried, in the
impotent rage of despair.

Something whitish suddenly appeared at the edge of the water. I
recognized the place. There, above the grave of a man who drowned
himself seventy years before, arose a stone cross, half sunken in the
ground, covered with characters almost illegible. My heart was beating
as though it would break. The white figure had disappeared.

"Annouchka," I cried, in such a fierce voice, that I even frightened
myself.

But no one answered; I finally decided to go and find out whether
Gaguine had not found her.




XX.


Quickly going up the vineyard road, I perceived a light in Annouchka's
room. This sight calmed me a little. I approached the house; the
entrance door was closed. I knocked. A window that had no light opened
softly in the lower story, and Gaguine thrust out his head.

"You have found her?" I asked him.

"She has returned," he answered in a low voice. "She is in her room and
is going to bed. All is for the best."

"God be praised!" I cried, in a paroxysm of indescribable joy. "God be
praised! Then everything is all right; but you know we have not had our
talk together."

"Not now," he answered, half closing the window; "another time. In the
meanwhile, farewell!"

"To-morrow," I said, "to-morrow will decide everything."

"Farewell," repeated Gaguine.

The window closed.

I was upon the point of knocking at it,--I wished to speak to Gaguine
one instant longer, to ask his sister's hand,--but a proposal of
marriage at such an hour! "To-morrow," I thought, "to-morrow I shall be
happy."

Happiness has no to-morrow; it has no yesterday; it remembers not the
past; it has no thought of the future; it knows only the present, and
yet this present is not a day, but an instant.

I know not how I returned to Z.--It was not my legs that carried me, it
was not a boat that took me to the other side; I was wafted along, so to
speak, by strong, large wings.

I passed a thicket where a nightingale was singing. I stopped, listened
a long time; it seemed to be singing of my love and my happiness.




XXI.


The next morning, on approaching the white house, I was astonished to
see the windows open, also the entrance door. Some pieces of paper were
scattered about the threshold; a servant, her broom in her hand,
appeared at the door. I approached her.

"They have gone!" she exclaimed, before I could ask whether Gaguine were
at home.

"Gone!" I repeated; "how is that? Where have they gone?"

"They went this morning at six o'clock, and did not say where they were
going. But are you not Monsieur N----?"

"Yes."

"Very well! my mistress has a letter for you."

She went upstairs, and came back with a letter in her hand.

"Here it is," said she.

"You must be mistaken, it's impossible!" I stammered.

The servant looked at me vacantly, and began to sweep.

I opened the letter; it was from Gaguine. Not a line from Annouchka!

In beginning, he begged me to forgive him for this hasty departure. He
added that when I was calmer I would approve, no doubt, of his
determination. It was the only means of getting out of an embarrassing
position, and one that might become dangerous.

"Yesterday evening," he said to me, "while we were waiting for Annouchka
in silence, I was convinced of the necessity of a separation. There are
prejudices that I respect; I can understand that you could not marry
her. She has told me all, and for her sake I must yield to her urgent
entreaties."

At the end of his letter he expressed regret at the breaking off of our
friendly intercourse so soon; hoped that I would always be happy;
pressed my hand, and begged me not to try and meet them again.

"A question of prejudices indeed!" I exclaimed, as if he could hear me.
"Folly all that! What right has he to take her away from me?" I clutched
my head wildly.

The servant began to scream for her mistress, and her fright brought me
to my senses. I felt that I had but one object: to find them again; to
find them again at any cost. To bear such a blow; to resign myself; to
see things end in this way was truly beyond my strength! I learned from
the landlady that they went at six o'clock to take the steamboat down
the Rhine. I went to the office; they told me that they had taken places
for Cologne. I returned to my house to pack up and immediately follow
them.

As I passed Dame Louise's house I heard some one call me. I raised my
head and perceived the burgomaster's widow at the window of the room
where the previous evening I had seen Annouchka. Upon her lips hovered
that disagreeable smile that I had noticed before. She beckoned to me. I
turned away, and was about to go on, but she called out that she had
something to give me. These words stopped me, and I entered the house.
How can I express to you my emotion, when I found myself again in that
little room.

"To tell the truth," began the old woman, showing me a note, "I should
only have given you this if you had come to my house of your own accord;
but you are such a fine young man--there!"

I took the note; I read upon a little piece of paper the following
lines, traced in haste with a pencil:--

"Farewell! we shall see each other no more. It is not through pride that
I go away; I cannot do otherwise. Yesterday, when I wept before you, if
you had said to me but one _word_, a _single word_, I would have
remained. You did not say it.--Who knows? Perhaps it is for the best
that it is so. Farewell forever!"

She had expected but "_one word_!" Fool that I was! That _word_ I said
the previous evening again and again with many tears; I threw it to the
wind; I cried it out in the midst of lonely fields: but I did not say it
to her; I did not tell her that I loved her! Yes, it was then impossible
for me to pronounce that word. In this fatal room, where I found myself
face to face with her, I was not yet fully conscious of my love; it did
not awaken even then, when in a dull and gloomy silence I stood near
her brother,--it only burst forth, sudden and irresistible, a few
moments after, when, terrified by the thought of a misfortune, I began
to seek her, calling aloud; but then already it was too late!--It is
impossible, they will tell me;--I know not if it is impossible, but I
know that it was so. Annouchka would not have gone if she had had the
least coquetry, if she had not found herself in an essentially false
position. An uncertain position that any other woman would have accepted
she found intolerable. This did not occur to me. My evil genius, then,
at my last interview with Gaguine, under his dark window, had checked
that confession which was upon my lips, and thus the last thread that I
could have seized had broken in my hands.

I returned the same day to L. with my traps, and started for Cologne. I
often remember that at the moment when the steamboat left the shore, and
when I said farewell to all those streets, to all those places that I
should never forget, I perceived Hannchen, the little servant-maid.

She was seated upon a bench near the river bank: though yet pale, her
face was no longer sorrowful. A handsome young fellow was by her side
and laughing with her, whilst at the other side of the Rhine my little
Madonna, concealed in the dark foliage of the old ash, followed me sadly
with her glance.




XXII.


At Cologne I again came upon the track of Gaguine and his sister. I
learned that they had gone to London. I immediately went to that city;
all researches that I made there were in vain. For a long time I did not
allow myself to be discouraged; for a long time I showed obstinate
persistence, but finally was obliged to give up all hope of meeting them
again.

I never saw them again! I never again saw Annouchka!--Later I heard some
quite vague rumors of her brother; but as to her I have never heard her
spoken of; I do not even know if she still lives.

Some years ago, while travelling, I caught sight for an instant, at the
door of a railway-carriage, of a woman whose face had a little
resemblance to those features that I shall never forget; but this
resemblance was doubtless the result of chance. Annouchka lived in my
memory as the young girl whom I saw at our last interview, pale and
trembling, leaning upon the back of a wooden chair in the dark corner
of a lonely room.

Besides, I must confess that the course of my grief was not of long
duration. Soon I persuaded myself that fate had been favorable to me in
preventing my marriage with her, and that a woman with such a
disposition would certainly not make me happy. I was still young at this
period, and that time so short and limited that they call the future
appeared to me infinite. "That which has happened once to me upon my
travels," I said to myself, "can I not meet it again, more charming and
more delightful?" Since then I have known other women; but that feeling
so tender that Annouchka had once awakened was never again aroused.
No--no glance has ever replaced the glance of those eyes fastened upon
mine; I have never again clasped to my breast a heart to whose throbbing
mine has responded with an ecstacy so joyful. Condemned to the solitary
existence of a wandering man, without a home, I regard those days the
saddest of my life; but I still preserve as a relic two little notes and
a withered sprig of geranium that she once threw me from the window; it
breathes even now a slight fragrance, whilst the hand that gave it to
me, that hand that I pressed upon my lips only once, has, perhaps, long
since returned to dust. And I, what have I become? What is there left in
me of the man of former days, of the restlessness of youth, of my plans,
of my ambitious hopes?--Thus the slight perfume of a blade of grass
outlives all joys, all human griefs,--outlives even man himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE GREEN HAND"

[Illustration]

The Deserted Ship.

A STORY OF THE ATLANTIC.

BY GEORGE CUPPLES.

Author of "The Green Hand," "The Sunken Rock," etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WORKS OF MRS. H. B. GOODWIN.


"There is nothing sensational or dramatic about the writings of Mrs. H.
B. GOODWIN. Her books are natural, heartfelt, and a true mirror of this
not altogether unromantic life of ours," says a distinguished critic.


ONE AMONG MANY.

A spirited and fascinating New Work by this gifted and popular author.


CHRISTINE'S FORTUNE.

_Like a pearl on the sands of the sea-shore is the story of Christine
among the average novels of the day. The incidents are few, and the
charm of the story lies in the unfolding of a pure and noble character,
and in the sketches of German life and scenery which form its harmonious
background. The interest though quiet is sustained, and no one who
begins the book will lay it down until he has finished reading it, and
will rise from it with the feeling that he has been in excellent
company. The style, the sentiments, and the teachings are faultless and
ennobling._


DR. HOWELL'S FAMILY.

"_Of the merits of this work it is difficult to speak too highly. It is
written in a style as near perfection as it is possible to conceive.
Better books a parent cannot put into the hands of a son or
daughter._"--WATCHMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Sly Ballades in Harvard China.

By E. S. M.


Dainty and unique in style, it will provide bright and amusing Summer
reading, appealing to the taste of cultivated people of society. The
papers are quite unconventional, and are treated with a rare sense of
humor. The versification has the genuine ring. The volume will
undoubtedly make a hit.--_Boston Saturday Evening Gazette._

Bright and full of fun.--_Boston Globe._

Graceful in fancy, and bright in wit and spirit. The author's drollery
is irresistible, and we should think young ladies would enjoy the book
as much as the beings of the opposite sex.--_Quebec Chronicle._

The author is anonymous--as usual, now-a-days--but he is known as one of
the foremost of a band of clever young writers.--_Springfield
Republican._

Writes always like a gentleman.--_N. Y. Mail._

The volume is of a high order.--_Boston Herald._

Suggests Hood at his best.--_Boston Journal._

One of the most charming of Summer books.--_St. Louis Globe-Democrat._

Written in the approved modern _Vers de Societie_ style, with a singular
mixture of wit and deep feeling. Many of the verses would not be
disowned by Praed, the master-genius of witty verse, or by Calverly, who
wrote "Fly Leaves," a few years back.--_Boston Advertiser._

Bret Harte created quite a sensation in London society by reading these
verses in manuscript.--_N. Y. Pub. Weekly._

The books contain some of the lightest and brightest bits of verse it
has lately been our good fortune to lead.--_The Critic._

       *       *       *       *       *

_WHENCE, WHAT, WHERE?_

_A VIEW OF THE ORIGIN, NATURE, AND DESTINY OF MAN._

BY JAMES R. NICHOLS, M.D., A.M.


EXTRACTS FROM NOTICES BY THE PRESS.

_From Forney's Philadelphia Press._

"Dr. Nichols' essays will be found stimulating reading. No one can take
up the book without feeling the inclination to read further and to
ponder on the all-important subjects which they present. Though it is
not a religious book in the technical sense of the word, it is a book
which calls for the exercise of the religious nature, and it is a book
which in diffusing many sensible ideas will be good."


_From Boston Commonwealth._

"The great value of the little book, 'Whence, What, Where?' by Dr. James
R. Nichols, is in its suggestiveness. It is eminently provocative of
thought. Its value is not to be tested by its bulk. It is full of clear
thinking, and of accurate statement. Dr. Nichols is severely scientific,
and, at the same time, devoutly spiritual. Its philosophy is largely
that of Swedenborg, without Swedenborg's terrible diffusiveness. We have
in it, concisely and clearly stated, all that the strictest scientific
research warrants us in believing of man's origin, nature, and spiritual
destiny. Science is shown to be not necessarily opposed to religion and
to spirituality."


_From Boston Christian Register._

"The book is written in a clear style, and the author's opinions are
readily understood. It is refreshing to have such a work from a
scientific layman, on topics which too many treat with a supercilious
disdain, unbecoming both themselves and the subject."


_From Boston Congregationalist._

"The topics discussed are handled with a good degree of candor, and give
in a small space much interesting information and perhaps some
profitable speculation."


_From the Lowell Mail._

"Its truths may be received as a new revelation from which consolation
and happiness may be derived by those who have been troubled with doubts
and misgivings."





End of Project Gutenberg's Annouchka, by Ivan Sergheievitch Turgenef

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNOUCHKA ***

***** This file should be named 39427-8.txt or 39427-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/2/39427/

Produced by sp1nd, Mebyon, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
